# Recursive Language Models w/ Alex Zhang

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Dr3SUmHFco&hl=en](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Dr3SUmHFco&hl=en)

**Channel:** [alphaXiv](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCG4Cbh6L9x6YRoUK3uFAZ1g)
**Duration:** 1:19:58

## Description

Description: We study allowing large language models (LLMs) to process arbitrarily long prompts through the lens of inference-time scaling. We propose Recursive Language Models (RLMs), a general inference strategy that treats long prompts as part of an external environment and allows the LLM to programmatically examine, decompose, and recursively call itself over snippets of the prompt. We find that RLMs successfully handle inputs up to two orders of magnitude beyond model context windows and, even for shorter prompts, dramatically outperform the quality of base LLMs and common long-context scaffolds across four diverse long-context tasks, while having comparable (or cheaper) cost per query.

---

## Transcript

Welcome everybody to a new AI for science talk. Today we are super excited to have Alex Zang with us from MIT who'll be talking about his new work which just been blowing up on Twitter and Alphaive and many other places on recursive language models. Um and I think before that uh in terms of the format of the talk uh we will have around 30 minutes um for the talk followed by another 30 minutes slash whenever Alex needs to leave for a lot of questions. So hold your questions and post them in the Q&A feature. It's just a lot easier to track um than the Zoom chat. So you could get that. I think there's like three dots at the bottom and you could find the Q&A option. Um, and yeah, I think we'll also have a place to pause in the middle for questions. I'm Raj, by the way. I help run Alphacive. Um, for those of you who don't know, we help you keep up with and apply the latest research.

So, we have a lot of tools to help you discover the latest research papers that are trending like recursive language models, which was trending on our site. Um, and we have a lot of tools to help you better understand um, papers. So, yeah. And with that, I will kick it off to Alex. >> Cool. Yeah. Um, so I actually I actually did uh for those that don't know, I did another talk on Alphacive uh in October because we I I originally wrote a blog um about this idea back in October. Uh and the paper came out in December, which is probably what most of you are familiar with. Um but yeah, I'm happy to be back on. Um like last time uh this will be kind of unstructured for the most part. I I have some content I want to go over mainly about um you know the method and and some of the the experiments in the paper.

Um but I think the rest of the talk will be kind of like an open floor for questions uh criticisms comments etc. I'm happy to to answer everything. Um but yeah so uh recursive language models uh is a uh I guess my the first paper of my PhD. Um and uh my other two co-authors are are actually my adviserss uh Tim Kraka and and Omar Katab. Um but yeah oh yeah so uh a tiny bit about me. Um I uh did my undergrad at Princeton. Uh I graduated uh in 2024 so almost two years ago. Um I mostly was doing work on um benchmarking stuff uh which is or benchmarking language models which is kind of relevant uh because a lot of the issues that we found on these benchmarks related to long context stuff which sort of motivated you know like how I ended up working on this um not fully but I think it's it's part of the picture.

Um the other thing that I'm very involved in is GPU mode. Um run by Mark Saraphim. Uh so uh I I guess I'm like a like a moderator of sorts. Uh I I also uh funnily enough host lectures and stuff there and uh help out with with some of the competitions and stuff that are ongoing. Um but yeah, I'm I'm pretty active there. So actually that that might be the best place to to like catch me or ask questions uh if you want to reach out for anything. Um and then I I started my PhD at MIT uh recently. So uh I'm currently I guess in my first year. Um so yeah I I think like this year especially but obviously like you know in in the past year or so uh there have been a lot of themes around recursion uh in deep learning and in language models. Um and most of these ideas I think are you know somewhat disjoint or like unrelated to like what I'm doing and and also like what each other are doing. uh but generally I think you know what this tells me is that there there is a bit of interest in methods uh that call like not necessarily call themselves but I think um split up or decompose uh problems in interesting easier sub problems.

I think like this this general idea um is sort of coming about and I think it it likely has to do with the fact that language models themselves or these like deep learning models are are sort of reaching um somewhat of a wall. I I I I want to be careful with that cuz I think obviously they're they're continuing to improve but um it is exponentially more expensive to improve a model. Um and so we we've reached points where like you know now we're starting to consider uh alternatives to the standard like transformer only way of thinking. Um and I think at the start of this year uh there was a lot of buzz around context management. So you know in my mind other than maybe uh the the recent like deepseek papers because I I feel like everything that they drop um is is usually a banger of sorts.

Um the the main kind of topics of interest uh were context management uh and uh scaffolds that handle coding. So like cloud code and uh I guess well more recently cloud work and and some other uh related ideas um basically around uh these these very well-made TUIs or like other kinds of simple scaffolds on top of your language model that increase productivity or um help you out and and with this is also like how they manage context because uh right now like you know language models have a context window limitation uh and this window is not particularly large. So, uh a lot of these methods have to deal with like long multi-turn long horizon uh problems. Um and yeah, so so you know with this uh is also the the RLM work uh which which fits quite nicely. Um and I think there have been some like really cool um works that have kind of spawned out.

I think uh the prime intellect blog is is an example and uh cursor and and openai and anthropic have all released uh various scaffolds that uh do some kind of long context management tricks. Uh so there's a lot of like ideas around this. Um, and this is kind of something I I wrote about in blog post, but basically I think the the general consensus or like feeling that a lot of people have gotten uh over the years is is kind of like long context uh work and like long context research is really unsatisfactory. Uh and and there's a lot of reasons for this. I think um you know we don't have a lot of good evals. we we don't have a lot of good um kind of ways of characterizing what makes a long context task hard. Uh I think for a while, you know, back in like 2023 or 2022, um a lot of the popular ideas were around like needle in the haststack or or really really simple tasks that just involved finding um one particular part of the prompt that uh might be kind of uh interesting or or or like necessary to find.

Uh and so one of the things that that we wanted to tackle or like propose in this in this paper is that you know there are significantly harder long context problems. I think uh the classic examples are like when you're using clawed code um most of the time like the long you know trajectories that it follows are are super dense and um you know have a lot going on and it tends to be the case that you know maybe the model misses something or it misses an instruction. Uh and and these are all problems I think that uh as a field like we we have been trying to figure out and solve and and and look for methods that that solve um these problems. Uh and so um before I talk about exactly what a language model recursive language model is, uh I will just provide a bit of intuition uh about like you know how do we go about thinking like um like what do we want in this in this kind of system or or potentially even new model.

Um and so I think like the the the simple thing is that uh long long distributions uh or or or long context data uh tends to be uh somewhat out of distribution from naturally occurring uh sequences that we train our models on. Uh and and this is kind of a a subtle but annoying thing. Uh and it it it's an explanation for why like context rot happens. Uh because language models are not necessarily trained on long sequences. Um and you know there's an argument to be made also that long sequences are particularly nasty uh because um they are you know high entropy. Um they they tend to obviously not occur naturally. So we have to generate them synthetically. Um, and it's it's much harder to capture like the distribution of of a longer sequence of data than it is for a shorter sequence. Um, the other kind of thing that is really annoying is extending the context window of a language model is is very expensive.

Uh, and when I when I say language model here, I mean a transformer-based model. Uh, which is an important distinction because I think um there has been a bit of debate on the naming of this method. uh like like why recursive language model? Uh like this is not a this is not a new like this is not a quen 4 type of thing, right? Like it's not a new transformer-based language model. Um and and that kind of plays into like what point three is talking about which is that ultimately you know nothing about a language model has to be a transformer. um like back in you know 2013 uh our language models were um like just these really simple uh statistical models um or like these like huristic methods. And I think the idea that I I kind of want to get across here is that uh the line between like a an RLM and an LM is is is a bit blurry.

Um but in general like the the purpose of both is the same which is uh a recursive language model at the end of the day uh is just an abstraction uh that is treated like a language model. So it can it ideally can solve any task that a language model can solve uh but it also can handle like you know near infinite context inputs and outputs uh without this like degradation problem. Um but yeah, so these are kind of like the the the basic ideas that I I I I want to get across as like motivating for for how we design this this whole system. Um so uh yeah, I can skip this actually. This this is kind of uh what I was talking about before, but um basically like you know we we we want these uh this system to act like a a model. Uh and and kind of the the last thing I will say is um we have done this in the past.

Um this is basically what agents are. Uh like agents are these complicated or not complicated scaffolds on top of a language model uh that help you like kind of uh deal with all your data in a in a way that like you are confident will work. So the language model will only tackle like certain parts of the data or it might transform certain parts and give it to another language model and and do this like you know kind of like feedback loop. Um and like the the intuition for a recursive language model is that all of this decision-m like all of this um design of an agent and and and things like this should be done by the model itself uh and and not by uh like a human engineer. Uh and in doing so you can directly optimize um you know how a a model handles this like all of this uh and and do it in kind of a clever way.

Um so yeah I think um for those that haven't read the paper or are unfamiliar uh a recursive language model is basically a inference strategy. You can think of it like an inference strategy uh on top of uh it's like a thin scaffold on top of a language model uh that basically has uh it it it gives the language model access to an environment. Uh in in most cases this environment will be a ripple uh like a Python ripple or your file system or or something else. Uh and and kind of the key insight is that um instead of feeding the prompt directly into the language model um so if we go back a slide like you know the way that you would normally query a language model is you feed in your prompt into the language model and it gives you an output. Uh instead we we store it inside of the environment.

Um and the language model doesn't actually see the prompt directly. Um but it is able to interact with the prompt. So it can use the code in the environment to interact with the prompt. Uh and not only that, inside of this ripple or this environment, it has access to a another language model which typically will be itself. Uh hence the recursive language model naming. Um uh and essentially with these sub calls um it can interact with the prompt in any meaningful way um using these sub calls and using the the the the ripple environment uh to build up a final answer and eventually produce some kind of response to the prompt that you've uh you've given it. Um, and so I think there's there's there's a few things that like I should kind of clarify here, which is that um, recursive language models are not necessarily just language models with the tool call uh to spawn a sub agent.

Um, which is kind of a misconception. I think the the naming comes from the fact that like this is a key like this is a key part of the of the uh algorithm or or or inference strategy. Um but really like what it boils down to is um we're sort of arguing that the ideal way or like the optimal way to give a sub call to a language model is this kind of abstracted um system uh where you have this like ripple like environment uh which is it's key and I will talk a little bit about what you know what this environment needs to have like what properties it needs to have um in order to do this kind of thing. Um, but yes, maybe I should stop here uh for any quick questions, maybe for like five or 10 minutes and then I'll I'll continue. >> Awesome. Thanks, Alex. Um, yeah, I think Raymond had some questions.

Um, let me just >> invite Raymond to unmute if they're here. >> Hey, what's up, Alex? Um, glad I got my question in first. Um, because I got to jump in a second. But my question, the Q&A was, um, if you were going to combine RLMs with coding agents, would you one give the agent an RLM tool or like CLI or something? Two, swap the underlying LLM call of the agent itself with an RLM, or three, none of the above? >> That's a good question. Uh so I think like it's it's difficult to predict I guess what will actually happen. Um in in my mind like the way to think about a recursive language model is basically the way that we use like GPT5 Pro currently um like these super high like long reasoning models. That was like the the original idea at least. And so, uh, you wouldn't really plug this into a coding agent or like a coding scaffold cuz for the most part it's too slow or like it's too expensive to do like, um, what typically are pretty easy subtasks.

Um that being said though I think like there is uh you a a use case of basically like you were saying a coding agent has the ability to call an RLM on a particularly nasty or or difficult thing that it's not sure how to solve. >> Um which is very useful >> mode kind of. >> Yes. Yes. Um but the other thing I will say is like um so an RLM has a ripple >> agent that's >> and it is a it is a coding agent um but in some sense too like >> this ripple is disjoint from the ripple that the coding agent itself maybe has access to. So they will be different. Um and in some cases like uh like I' I've seen some people implement this where like they're the same. Um, so the ripple that the that the RLM has access to is is basically the coding environment that it's that the coding agent is trying to deal with.

And in this case, like I think to me, this is not the right way to deal with it. Although like it works. I I think like to an extent it does work. Um, but yeah, I mean honestly it it remains to be seen because I I think also like it's entirely possible for an RLM itself to just be the interface that you deal with, right? So like there there is a plausible future where um like cloud code is a very interactive thing. So and I think it's it's a key feature of it that makes it very nice. Um but there are also certain types of problems where like you just never want to interact with the model like you just want it to run and and do its thing. And in this case like you could just do an RLM call for this. Um, but yeah, kind of a non-answer, but uh >> yeah, not to hog all the time, but like if you had to like think of an eval for that, like obviously the oolong stuff that you guys did is more just like in the like information retrieval world, but like if you were going to think about like well in what might be the right um framework for RLMs to help with coding, I feel like I don't know like Sweetbench is like so saturated, no offense, other tigers and Um I I don't know.

Do you have a sense of like what would be the >> like how would you tell what the best way for those to interact? Yes. What would a benchmark be that would like that you would consider important? >> So I think I think because RLMs are supposed to be task agnostic. >> Uh we want to just see them do well on everything basically. Uh and to me the most important tasks or like unsolved problems right now are like long long trajectory like agent things. Um so like for example uh like tile bench is a good example of this. Um I think like anything that involves like multi-turn or like very long histories of information. Um evolutionary methods are another example of this. Uh language models don't do very well in these settings. like the the methods that use language models that involve long histories as well uh tend to not work well.

Um GPU programming is another example of this or like low resource languages in general where you need to retrieve from some kind of documentation uh because the actual language itself is not baked into the model. Um these are all settings where like there are good examples of of long long horizon problems that I think uh RLMs are are very well suited for. So >> Okay. Yeah. >> Awesome. Well, thank you so much. I will seed the floor. >> Yep. >> Cheers. >> I think uh we could just have um there's quick question from Jav. I think you'll be covering some of more of the details. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> Yeah. Let me just um >> I I don't have too many more slides. So, I think there there will be a lot of time for questions, so don't worry. >> Yeah. I I guess the super quick question, maybe you'll go into this, but it's like how how exactly is uh the RLM creating these subprompts?

Like can you provide more detail on that? >> Oh, um so the if Oh, maybe maybe let me go to let me skip ahead uh here. Yeah. So, uh it's super simple. So I think the the idea is that uh the this um well the the RLM basically contains a language model and an environment uh and inside of the environment it can spawn more RLMs. I think for the for the sake of not confusing people let's just say that these these like little RLM things over here on the side are just language models. uh because in in some sense a language model is a an example of a recursive language model where the environment is doing nothing like the environment just feeds the prompt directly into the model. These are equivalent kind of definitions. So um basically like with other sub aent calling mechanisms like the language model itself is the one that is writing uh these like subprompts for the these sub aents. uh which is very important because um this is this goes back to like the scaling argument that I was making before which is that we or like the bitter lesson kind of argument which is that we want all of the decision making regarding sub agents to be completely up to the language model itself.

Uh so there's no human imposed bias here uh on what exactly it should be doing in terms of subprompts. Awesome. Um, yeah, I think we could continue on. >> Cool. Yeah. Um, okay. So, I think, uh, these are maybe the two most important slides and then everything after that is just like, you know, h like results and and some other stuff that you can probably just read in the paper as well, uh, which I will kind of gloss over because, um, the TLDDR is like, oh, like, you know, it works pretty well. So, that's that's great. Um, but I think the the thing to make super super clear here is like what are the essential components of an RLM? Because I think the example I provided here is super simple, right? Like it's a language model interacting with an environment and the environment has access to sub calls.

Um, and so in theory like this encapsulate encapsulates a lot of things but I think uh that flexibility is not good. like I I I think there are there are very particular properties of this environment which I've kind of glossed over uh that make it well suited for uh recursive sub calls. Uh and that is kind of the key thing that I that I want to make clear and and and is also you know being articulated in the paper. Um so I think there are like three three big things that like kind of all need to come together uh for this method to make sense. Um, so number one is like uh we need for an RLM it needs to have a uh a symbolic handle to the prompt. And all that this really means is like it has a reference to the prompt um available to it that it like that the language model itself doesn't necessarily see so it's offloaded um but it exists somewhere uh and the language model can interact with this thing.

Uh and the second thing is like you know we I I think the the one of the arguments here uh for RLMs is like we are combining the fuzzy aspect of a language model with the like symbolic kind of uh verified domain of uh like a symbolic language or like a programming language. Um and these two things are really important. Uh and and the example I will give is kind of in the next slide but um the way that we have been using language models in the past like for tool calls and things like this is we kind of we know the language models are really good, right? Like we know we know that they can solve a lot of things that are really really hard to write in code. Uh but at the same time like you don't get the guarantees that you would normally get with code. uh which can be frustrating at times. I'm sure like everyone has experienced this at some point where the language model gives you an answer or or does something that is not really what you asked it or like it makes a mistake somewhere along the way.

Um and there's like no guarantees like you can never ensure that it's going to give you something correct. Um and and we want a way for during the when the language model is like quote unquote reasoning through a problem uh we want to give it more guarantees. And this is kind of the like combining the fuzziness with the with the um symbolic part. So if people have questions about this like I'm very happy to answer them because I think this is like the key part of of everything. Um and and the third thing which is like super super important. Um and like like needs to be very clear is um and I I mentioned this before which is the the RLM like the way that it performs recursion like the way that it does the sub language model call is super important um and and it's very subtle because um this is something that most scaffolds uh do not currently do.

So like most context management things don't currently do. Uh someone sent me this like clawed programmatic API thing which which does something somewhat similar. Um but it's as far as I understand like this is like a beta feature that they they've been experimenting with. Um and again it's it's still mainly for coding settings. Um but symbolic recursion basically means that the sub call is embedded as a function inside of this environment. Um so this slide is maybe a little bit more of an illustrative example of what I mean. Um and and uh the other thing I I want to make clear here is like all three of these points together are what make an RLM. Like these are like each one of them you can probably find in some example out in the wild. Um but it it hasn't really like clicked I think um at least for me until until now.

Um with like how all of these three components kind of uh work together. So um this symbolic recursion thing is is maybe the most confusing part. Um, and it it really boils down to like does the sub aent get called inside the ripple or outside the ripple. Um, and so if you've used cloud code or or uh codeex or or seen some of these other sub aents, uh you're probably familiar with the fact that the way that they implement tool calls and sub calls and all these kinds of things um are from the model. So the model will output like a JSON like it'll so it'll be solving a problem and then it'll see something and it'll say okay um I want you I want to launch a sub call to to look at something um and like perform this action. Uh and and the the point I'm I'm trying to make with the RLM stuff is that typically these agents have access to a ripple and they also have access to a sub call.

Uh but the sub call itself is not inside the ripple. It's like in it's an independent tool. Um, and this is somewhat problematic because the sub call cannot be made in a programmatic way or at least it's not done in a way that lends itself well to programmatic patterns. Um, and the reason why we want to do programmatic patterns is is typically a lot of problems, especially like logical decomposition problems, which is is fundamentally what an RLM is doing is is decomposing your context in a meaningful way. um and running sub language model calls to solve this this context um without this like programmatic or or symbolic recursion uh you're basically very limited in what you can do here um and and you actually it is very important that um the sub call lives inside the ripple so you know I will reiterate this point multiple times but I think this is like a a super like key part of the design of um of the RLM um >> Alex interrupt you I think we had a good question in the chat. >> Could you give an example?

You had in the previous slide um you mentioned the symbolic handle to the prompt P. Could you give example of like >> Oh yes. Um >> what that might mean? >> So basically all that this means uh it's just a fancy way of saying like um the prompt lives in a variable or a file that the model has access to. Um, and symbolic. The reason it's quoteunquote symbolic is you can use this variable or file for like other programmatic operations like you can you can you can read the file or like the variable you can like transform it. You can apply like string manipulation to the to the variable and things like this. Um, but at the very least like you need some kind of uh some kind of access to the prompt that lives in this ripple environment. Um, that's yeah. Awesome. Yeah, that makes sense. There's some demand as well to walk through like a simple and realistic example, but maybe later. example uh is is a really silly example.

Uh, but it's basically like suppose I have um a a really really large um data set of um I don't know like uh movie reviews or something. I like some something like this. It's maybe not the best example because this is this is sort of synthetic. Um maybe a better example is like let's say I have like a billion files in this like mono repo. Um and I want my model like I I'm not able to GP out what I want. Like I want my model to find some kind of like hidden thing that I like forgot about. Like I just don't know where it is and it's I can only describe what it does. I actually don't know like exactly what the function is called or anything like that. So, so you know, running a reax thing or like a greer is not going to solve your problem. So, what you're going to sort of have to do in this case is you're going to have to read every file or you're going to need like if let's say you have infinite compute, uh you're going to need to read every file and have a language model read every file.

Uh if you called claude code to do this thing, um chances are what it's going to do is it's going to launch a bunch of sub calls like not programmatically like it's going to in its own context like go through each file and tell you like you know it might save this information to a file but it's going to go through each file like you know spit out a like a tool like look at this file, look at this file, look at this file. Um and then eventually it's going to reach its context limit. So, it's going to compact uh and and the hope is that it's going to remember the files that it looked at. Um but obviously like it might not and it might, you know, it might go back and look at files it's already looked at. Um or just miss a file that actually contains the answer. Um but the programmatic way of doing this is really easy, right?

Like you write a for loop or you write like a loop over all your files. Um and you just call a sub call over this. And for the language model to output this logic is significantly easier. Um this is like a silly but like you know somewhat realistic example. I think the more realistic examples come from the really long horizon things like really long trajectories um where basically like um the model needs to um it needs to look at sort of like um okay actually here's here's maybe an example. I I I hope this this this sort of makes sense in like evolutionary methods. Um like language model based evolutionary methods. Uh a common thing that people will do is um and for those that are unfamiliar, an evolutionary method is roughly like um you start from some some like uh let's say you're you're trying to use an evolutionary method to solve a game.

So you'll start with a like a starter agent that obviously cannot solve the game and then the language model will mutate it a little bit like it'll update its code um and then it using the original one and then it will like try it on the environment get a score and then it will like it will build up this archive of agents or like of solutions and then it will look at like this archive and basically try to mutate out another um solution. Uh and and the reason this is annoying is at a certain point like you have a lot of things or like things you want to evolve uh and and you want to basically look at a lot of those things and use that information to like kind of produce um a more meaningful mutation or something, right? So like the more information you have the better. Um but obviously the language model cannot ingest all of your like your entire archive because it's too big.

So, you're going to want to do this in a programmaticish way. Like right now, how people commonly do it is they'll they'll build up basically effectively they'll build up a simple agent that goes through all of the the solutions in the archive uh sub calls on them like generates some kind of like summary or like some kind of like uh I don't know some kind of information that's related to it, aggregates it together and then like produces a final mutation. Um, but you know the the recursive language model can natively just do this. Um, and and an agent that has only access to JSON sub calls will struggle to do this because this is a very structured task. Um, in general like you know we we like things that have structure, right? But uh you know if you've ever tried a language model on a game for example um like you know why are language models not very good at chess even though like we have models that can play chess um at a far you know like superior level to like Magnus Carlson.

Uh and like the short answer is these language models don't really they don't reason through in a very structured or like algorithmic way. Uh, and in a similar way, like we want to draw out this ability, but also add in like the fuzzy sub calling component. Um, yeah, hopefully that wasn't too too confusing. Um, but yeah. >> Oh, yeah, that was great. Thanks, Alex. >> Uh, cool. Are there more questions or should I should I >> I think you could >> Okay, I will be really quick with this. I realize it's it's it's 140. Um so basically the last thing I I I I wanted to go over was just the experiments. I think the main thing in these experiments we wanted to show was like a we can deal with long context problems that are like really really big. Uh b like you know we can deal with context rot. So even if if uh the the task fits in the context window um there is a lot of performance degradation uh and so RLMs can deal with this too.

Uh and then C like you know they scale very well. Um there was another experiment that I ran that is not included in here which is a training experiment. Um and you guys will have to just wait for that. Uh actually it's completely done. I just I I need to write it in and update the archive. Um a lot of these tasks are very similar to the ones in the blog post. Um but basically uh it's it's basically like we were describing here. Um I think I I won't really talk about what these are. I think I I'd rather people just just read the paper for this. Um because to be honest, I think these details uh are important obviously, you know, uh to to see where RLMs do well and where they don't. But um at the same time, like I think they're not necessarily the most important part of what I'm talking about and and what I think is interesting about this this paper.

Um so very generally like RLMs work very well. um they're very cost effective and and the reason is like using the programmatic environment like using the code it actually often doesn't need to look at the entire context which is like a key thing for many problems. Um like many problems really are sparse with respect to the prompt and so you can filter out a lot of information uh without ever without the language model ever even looking at it. Um, and if if this does if you're not very comfortable with this idea, um, I think a really intuitive way to think about this is like, you know, I'm sure a lot of you guys that are listening to this or like are in this call right now are researchers or engineers or or, you know, you've played with large data sets or or things of this nature. Uh, and I can guarantee you that none of you have read through the entire data set for like any of these data sets that you're playing with.

You're not looking at every single entry. Um, and there's a good reason for this. like for the most part there's a lot of structure um you know you can use like EDA and and other kinds of like stat statistical tools uh to look through this data uh and so for the most part like there's no need to look at all this stuff um you can write scripts that help you ingest and parse this information um and and you can think of the way that you interact with this data uh the same way that like an RLM will interact with a lot of data which is you are the language model in this case interacting with some kind of environment like a Jupyter notebook. Um, and every so often like you will look at something and you can think of that like a suball uh and and and you will you know make some kind of conclusion or inference based on the thing that you've looked at and often times it's some kind of transformation of your data uh using Python or or some other tool that you're you're doing.

So this is like a very useful way to think about it. Um I think yeah uh we we do have some other results for smaller models as well but uh I will share that later. Um I think the other thing I I want to highlight is like you know inference costs are are relatively reasonable except they can be longtailed. This is something that we have to tune but in general like you know RLM trajectories can get really long and really expensive if the model is confused uh and unsure about its answer. um because uh like I was showing here like the RLM is doing a loop of sorts. Uh and so um it's not going to provide an answer until it feels like it has a sufficient answer. Again, this is kind of analogous to a person looking at a Jupyter notebook. They're not going to be done until they're they're confident that what they're looking for is is something that they found.

Um so, uh this plot is also it's like the teaser figure for the paper. Um it's kind of showing that like recursive language models scale really well um to really dense problems. Uh which is very nice, you know, like we we want these language model systems um to be able to handle all types of long context problems. Um but yeah, I think uh I'll skip this. I think uh these are kind of the things that I've been thinking about for what we want to work on in the future. Uh training is a big one. Uh and the reason is like I think RLMs another way to view RLMs is basically like we we are proposing that reasoning models should be done differently. Um and that models should reason uh like both through tokens and also through programmatic environments. Um number two is obviously like making inference faster and and and building up systems that are really efficient for RLMs.

Um this is an open research question. I think you know I I'm happy to talk about this. Um it's also something we might start up in the GPU mode server. Um so I mean if you're involved in that like I'm I'm happy to chat. Uh and then three obviously uh like you know Raj mentioned like you know what settings are RLM most useful for? What new problems can we solve with RLMs that we previously could not? Uh and this is like a really really important and and uh really interesting problem. Um but yeah with that um I will stay a little longer so you know feel free to ask any questions. I'm very happy to answer. Um, yeah, thank you. >> Awesome. Thank you so much, Alex. Um, yeah, we'll just jump right in as there are a lot of questions. Um, Rob, if you're still here, um, feel free to jump in. >> Awesome. >> I hope the question is pretty straightforward.

Go for it. >> So I was just wondering u you give any thought to strategies that would allow for unconstrained recursion depth. I know in the paper you set K to one which feels like a pretty constraining amount of recursion to me. >> Yes. Um, okay. >> I I will give you sort of a thought experiment example because and I I think like like with anything in in research like uh ideas move with the field. So what I mean by this is currently all of the evals that we consider for language model stuff is like I have this this like testlike problem and I want you to solve it, right? And so these types of problems typically are like, you know, you you give it to a human, they'll take like 10 or 15 minutes or even like, you know, a few seconds or something. I don't know. Like it really depends on the task.

But for the most part, like a lot of these problems are like not on on its own, none of them are that interesting to be honest. I think the the most interesting problem we've seen is like some of like the unsolved like Erdosh problems. Um, and I I I think like we've thought this way for a really long time because this is what language models are best at like very direct answers to things that often just can be solved very quickly. Um, or can be solved without a lot of logical steps. Um, I think the best example of this is uh are you familiar with humanity's last exam like the HLE benchmark? >> Uh, slightly. Yeah. >> Yeah. So this is the best example of this. I think this benchmark I mean to the creators credit it it was a it was a very impressive uh like design of of how they like you know got all these people together to to build this thing.

But to me like the way this benchmark is constructed is is very silly. So like the basically the whole premise of this benchmark for people that aren't familiar is it's like I think like 500 really hard problems or like really hard problems. Uh and what they mean by that is like they are these very niche like scientific problems that um a model like would struggle to answer because it doesn't really have the prior to answer them correctly. Um so if you look at it there's like a wide range of of things. There's like TCS problems, there's like biology problems. they they say it's like oh these are problems that like a PhD student uh would struggle or maybe like you know be suited to solve right this is how they frame it um but most of the problems in that benchmark are very like straightforward in the sense that like if you have the knowledge you can solve it almost instantly um and I I think there are more interesting problems beyond that which I would consider to be quote unquote harder problems so like for example um I I've given this example several times because I I I talked with someone about this.

Um like what if the thing that you ask the model is like um you know I want to design a um an algorithm for protein folding, right? And I mean this is somewhat of a solve problem. So like we know but like I tell chat GBT like I want to solve protein folding. Like how do I go about doing this? For the most part, like when you ask Chat GBC this answer, you're not expecting it to give you a serious answer. Like you're not expecting it to spit out some algorithm for you to use um for your whatever work, right? Um and I I think like this is actually a plausible thing for a model to do. Uh given a sufficiently well-designed system, this is like not out of the question. And I think to me like this is where RLMs are particularly interesting especially like long further recursion depths because right now like we don't we don't really need anything beyond uh recursion depth one because all of the problems we're considering are for the most part like not super like they don't require a lot of exploration.

Um they mostly are just decomposed into like simpler sub problems that a language model can solve. And so if you have something though like solve this math problem or like solve protein folding or like solve this more abstract but like very well-defined problem. I think this is where the higher recursion depths are really interesting because what you will observe is the RLMs like will naturally decompose into scaffolds that typically we would have tried to design as like an agent designer. you know like all these orchestrators and like all these like separate sub aents like all this stuff should somewhat be kind of deployable by the model itself and that I think is where RLMs with further recursion become super super interesting. Um but I think as a field we're not there yet and so that's kind of why like it's not something we've we've you know seriously looked into. >> Yeah. >> Awesome.

Um Oliver had a nice question. Um, Oliver, are you here? >> Okay, I can just ask it. >> Feel free to Yeah. >> Yeah, it it Oliver asked how how does this approach uh compare to I think one of your previous works with Omar at DSPY. >> Oh, um I should clarify that uh I DSPY is is fully Omar's project. Um I'm we we are implementing RLMs as a module. I'm not um there there um there are some wonderful folks uh that are doing this. Uh Drew Brunig is is one of them. Um who are implementing RLMs uh into DSPI as a module. I I won't go into too much detail about what that means. Um so for people that know what how DSPI works um you know make of that what you will but I I think basically like we are adding RLMs as a feature to DSPI uh they are somewhat orthogonal though so DSPI is a prompt optimizer um and it uses a lot of like uh prompt optimization techniques I think most notably recently Jeepa uh like the G ga uh not not Yonkun's uh thing um for prompt optimization um and RLMs are mainly for like they are mainly a a new inference paradigm for how we even query language models.

So um you know they they work they work together but very orthogonal uh kinds of uh projects. >> Awesome. Uh Henry >> Oh yeah. Hey, what's up? Um, I had a question about the toy example you gave earlier, which I think was about like reading like a movie corpus where there are a bunch of pages and each sub agent is going to read one of the pages. I would worry that if I did that in practice that the recombining step of like, you know, take the responses from all the 100 sub agents and combine them into one summary would be difficult. Have you seen that limitation in practice? Um, are you referring to like the the RLM approach to it or the the standard approach like the tool calling approach to it? >> Oh, however you would implement it in RLM. >> Oh, okay. Well, so the the the example I was trying to give is that basically like if I wanted to process that many files um and and and there's a very structured way I'm doing it which is I'm looping through all the files.

Um and and there's another way of saying this which is like maybe I only want to look at files that satisfy some property like I can narrow it down to certain files. um how a language model would do this is is very difficult to say like it it might get it right, it might get it wrong. Um the RLM though will write the code to do this which is a lot more reliable is is more the point I was trying to get at. Um but let's say like we talk about this this condensing things together, right? Um or like summarizing everything together. I think in this case like you know for example what an RLM might do uh if it's sufficiently prompted or or trained is instead of like once it gets all of the summary or like once it gets some kind of information from all these files uh instead of summarizing them all at once or like collecting them all at once it might aggregate them in like a like a merging way uh like like a kind of like a tree based way or like it might merge them like all of the the point also with this is that This decision-m does fall on the model on like what it chooses to do, but it basically is able to implement algorithms or like more structured forms of how it does it instead of relying on fully itself to implement the algorithm.

Like um with the sub agent as a tool, you are relying on the language model itself to implement the the algorithm of how it deploys the sub agent calls um fully by itself like with with no with no code. Like it's as if you asked a person to do it um without like any any kind of like uh pencil and paper or anything like they have to just do it all in their head. uh which is like not not ideal I guess. Um I don't know if that answers your question but >> yeah that's helpful. Thank you. >> Awesome. Um had a quick question from Rahan. >> Rayon can't hear you. >> Can you hear me now? >> Yeah. >> Okay, cool. Um yeah, I guess I had a quick question on your point about like future work regarding RLM inference. How is how is RLM inference is that is that different from from from LLM inference? Are there specific problems you have to handle there?

And >> actually yeah, I guess yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh it's a good question. So uh LM inference uh is basically boils down to like VLM style things uh where or like serving engines where basically we need an efficient way to uh deal with like many many concurrent requests um and like cache everything well and all this kind like it's it's a whole thing right um when I say RLM inference like what I'm kind of referring to is Um so there is like a very like uh TCS way of talking about this uh sorry like theoretical computer science way of talking about this which is like in an RLM like when an RLM deploys sub calls um some of them can be parallel or like asynchronous with each other and some of them cannot. Um, and there is like sort of an like okay I want to be careful here because there sort of is an equivalent problem.

Uh, I I forget the name at this point because it's it's been a while but it roughly boils down to like what work can you do in parallel and what work has to be done um like there are some causal relationships between them. Um and in designing an RLM inference engine like those are considerations that you have to make sort of um which is like can you speed up an inference call for um like a single RLM request. So like for language models typically we either care about like the the latency like the the time to first token um or we care about like the throughput of the system with multiple like multiple prompts uh like multiple concurrent requests. uh for an RLM. I'm kind of even thinking about this in a s like a simpler way, which is like let's just say the only thing we're optimizing for is like a single RLM call.

Like I'm I'm hosting this on my on my machine locally and I want the RLM to be really fast. Like I I want it to give an answer back to the user as quickly as possible. Uh how would I go about doing this? like how and and also you know the other part of this which is not necessarily an inference problem is like how what interface can we design uh for an RLM so that it can implement all of these primitives like this like these asynchronous calls these non these blocking calls um this kind of like this kind of behavior basically like how how can we implement this so that it's very natural for the RLM because we don't necessarily want it to just be implementing like multi-threaded and multipprocess code all the time. Like I I think it's kind of unnatural to do that. Um because the the the code that the RLM is producing should like one to one reflect exactly its intention of like what it's trying to do.

And I think that kind of stuff is somewhat distracting. Um but yeah, that's that's kind of what I mean by by inference. And a quick followup here is like it seems like so the the the inference engine is one component here, but the I guess the root agent or whatnot itself would need to also know okay which calls it would need to make async or like which does it even make sense to do async. Okay. Right. >> Yeah. Yeah. I and I you know in an ideal world actually like uh I mean this is too far like forward thinking but like you know you can add like a thin compiler type of thing where like in in the model just doesn't even care like the the agent doesn't care at all. It makes these sub calls and we can somewhat interpret like what needs what can be done in parallel what cannot. So yeah all very interesting directions I think. >> Awesome.

Um, a quick note on time, Alex. Um, I think we're officially past hour, so whenever you need to leave. >> Yeah. Yeah, it's it's fine. I'm happy to to keep to stay on for a bit. >> Um, Joseph, are you here? >> Yes. Uh, yeah, thank you. I had multiple questions, but I'll be quick. Uh, one, how about binary data? Have you explored this? Uh, video, for example, is a classic long uh context problem. Understanding video. you could dice it with ffmpeg, you could write code. >> Um, other thing is I'm still pondering about the sub aent capability of cloud code and how that itself could be recursive, right? I think you can potentially implement recursion inside cloud code sub aents. Uh, it doesn't have to be just the outer one. Yeah. So those are the two questions I believe there. >> Yep. Yeah. So, uh, for video, uh, nothing in the design of the RLM requires the prompt to be text or, uh, or any as long as it's some kind of maybe, let's say, like serializable representation or just something that can sit in your file system.

Uh, in theory, it is ingestable by an RLM. Uh, now, how well this work pro works probably depends on your model itself as well. Um, but I did see a repo someone put out recently of like they implemented RLMs for videos. Um, which you know roughly boils down to like the model is making decisions about how it processes the video. Um, yeah, there's no limitations there. I I haven't tried it like uh myself, but I don't see a reason why it can't be done. Um, yeah, that that's my answer to that. Uh the the other thing is uh yes claude code can definitely implement deeper layers of recursion or you know claude code has a cloud code is very similar in in in that respect like for for how sub calls are like a key part of how it's designed. Um the the the point that I you know want to make with that though is is is this slide again which is like I think even if Claude code implemented uh you know the ability to spawn sub agents inside of sub aents and all like use the same model and and have this recursive design.

Um I still think it's like fundamentally limiting how how they have currently implemented it. That being said, like obviously it appears that they might be moving towards trying this strategy out as well uh with some of the the recent stuff that they've put out. Um but I I am sort of like like one of the bets that I I am I'm like very happy to take is that this style of symbolic recursion is is much more uh is much better at least in the long term uh for how sub agents will be called in the future. Um, I suspect a lot more scaffolds will take on this design as well. Um, but yeah. >> Yeah, congratulations. This is great work. >> Thank you. >> Awesome. Um, we'll go ahead with Rockshet next. Um, but before that, Jav, I saw your question um for these talks, anyone who's has an AlphaCive account, they should get emails u for all the future talks.

Um, and we post them on our YouTube as well. So, I link both of those in the chat. Um, and yeah, next week we actually have an exciting talk from Changlay C, who's a Ph. >> Oh, yeah. >> Um, who's gonna be talking about automated AI research. So, kind of different. >> Um, but yeah, Rit, are you here? Um >> if not um I could just ask um so yeah the question was how do RLMs work with small or even tiny models like 70 or even less parameters. >> Great question. Um yes I have results for this now. Um the short answer is it doesn't work very well but you can very easily fine-tune them to work pretty well. Um, so the like the actually funnily enough the 7B model like so I tried Quen 3 8B you know basically the same. Um, and it does really bad on all of these benchmarks. The the main reason is that the context window of Quen 3 8B is very small.

It's like 32K. Um, but one of the things we tried was we took Quen 3 coder like the 480B model. uh we ran it on a completely different benchmark like unrelated tasks. Um we filtered the trajectories uh for only short trajectories and then we fine-tuned quen 3 uh 8b with these trajectories uh and it significantly boosted its performance um as an RLM and then also with respect to the base model. So yes, it definitely can be done. And the the I guess kind of the obvious reason why it can be done is like if you think about like what the RLM is doing like the what it's actually producing uh it's not that complicated like it's it's basically just decomposing a problem. Uh which is a very hard problem but for in most cases it's not that hard. Um and it's just producing like a code snippet uh that you know somewhat programmatically goes through this problem and and launches sub calls.

So um I'm quite confident that small models uh can be trained as RLMs and be very very effective. actually um a very exciting direction of research to me is showing that small model RLMs can handle really really big contexts um much better than like GVt5 or like these like frontier models. I think this is like a a super super interesting line of work. >> Awesome. Um we had a um another question in the chat that was interesting which was what types of problems does the RLM still get wrong today? like what's keeping it from you know getting 100% on benchmarks. >> So I think oolong is a really good example of like in theory if the RLM is being smart it should just oneshot this benchmark like there's no reason it's not getting 100% on it. Um, I think like one of the bigger problems right now is just that, you know, the the RLM is fundamentally a bet that scaling like scaling by training or post- training as an RLM is really useful.

Um, and so what that kind of implies is that like all of these results which are on currently existing models that have never even seen or heard of an RLM before, um, like they can be greatly improved. Uh, and it's mainly by like the choice of decomposition and like the the choices that the model makes um, as an RLM will get better and better. Um, and that's like to me is like the key thing because um like right now the models are able to do decently well because um like the the RLM problem like the decomposition problem is simple enough for it to understand. But I think like there's there's definitely a lot of room for improvement with training. like I I am very excited um to see RLM training as like a new kind of axis of scale um like a new kind of uh reasoning thing. So, but that remains to be seen. >> Cool.

Um yeah, I think Omar had some questions. Let me just Omar, are you able to unmute? Yes, I am saying that what I understand from your talk Alex is the is the prompt optimization is a very good thing. We know that from yeah DSPI a py and uh from this I mean I want to understand is RLM is equal to yeah DSPI prompt optimization plus cloud code coding agent. >> Uh no I would not say that. Um I think so this this slide is sorry this one is sort of key for why RLMs and cloud code are not the same. I will say too like RLMs are more like the way to think about this is cloud code is a very very mature maybe not that mature but a a a a very wellthoughtout and built like coding scaffold and you can use it for non-coding tasks like I I I think that's like I'm not going to argue with that. I I I fully agree with that.

Um, but the point I'm trying to make with all this RLM stuff is that a like this design or like this um, you know, the basic idea of claude code uh, with a few key modifications which is which is a lot of this stuff um, lends itself very well to being trained which I think is actually you know pe people talk a lot about like oh you can just train XYZ but actually I think it's it's quite hard to train things or like push them to um like a further frontier uh like beyond what we currently have. And I think to me like RLMs are really really interesting here because they they solve problems in a very different way than like reasoning models do. Uh and I think they lend themselves very well to actual training like not DSI is is more prompt optimization. I'm talking about more like gradient-based training of the model that is being used as an RLM.

Um and and I think claude code like well you cannot train claude code obviously uh and and you're you're you cannot train Opus 4.5 that that's that's up to anthropic to do and I I suspect they you know they've already trained it actually to fit into cloud code but they will likely like you know given a lot of the stuff that they've um come out with recently I think they're also going to start moving in this direction and we're going to see this more and more of like these very kind of generic uh recurs version like systems uh that can solve really complicated problems very well. >> Awesome. I had a question myself actually. I was kind of playing the last couple days um with their the minimal code base and and just trying out some fun examples. So, I was trying out the um like an olong style light version um where I had like basically like five data set with like 500 events and each each each event was like it just had like text and then a date and then my query was like find like the busiest month.

So I think when I was testing it out like the RLM instead of like doing like smart chunking and sending like a bunch of events to in as like its sub LLM query at once, it would send like each of the 500 events and like all the LLM. wondering like if they're like this seems like a very easy case to like >> chunk more efficiently and make it more efficient or maybe this was just because of the minimal code base and like >> um it also what model did you use by the way because that this is also an interesting thing. >> Um I need to check I think it might have been GPT. Um >> oh interesting >> I I I I could be wrong. any >> so one of the things I observed is that and this is maybe an obvious point but like different models do different things like they do w they make wildly different decisions um I think GPT 5 from what I've observed is pretty smart about how it chunks and does stuff it's not definitely not close to optimal but it's it's much better than Quen uh and Quen this is something we wrote about in the paper um Quen does something really silly which is it will do what you said it it will launch recursive calls uh on everything.

Um which is also not what we want. And so I think uh in designing like you know like picking a model to train on um and make better there are a lot of considerations about like um this is kind of what I was getting at with like runtime and like you know doing inference properly and also considering you know compute costs um and and things like this. So, um this is all stuff I think that can be trained away. Uh you know, hopefully, but um yeah. Yeah, I I think it it doesn't have as much to do with the fact that it was the minimal scaffold. Um although it's it's also possible that that's the case, but um you might run into the same problems even with the with like the main repo that we that we have. >> Got it. That makes sense. Um cool. Uh how are you on on time? Should we maybe do one more question or >> I can do maybe a few more. >> Okay, awesome.

If there >> Yeah, there was a question in the chat which was like if there's a depth limit for RLM and like if so, what might that be? >> Yeah, so the depth limit currently I I I I kind of answered this uh earlier, but the depth limit is one uh from the paper. Um, but there are more interesting cases in the future where you might want to increase that. Uh currently I don't really see a reason to go beyond that but um like for like 2026 January I don't see a reason to go beyond that but maybe in six months this will be different. >> Sweet. Um Daniel are you here? >> Yeah. Uh hi Alex. I I had a kind of had a question on you know what you think the the most sort of promising problems that RLMs can solve are because I mean when you have long context there's sort of the >> there's a long you know bloated context window.

It's either a cuz you know the LLM is reasoning over very long periods of time or there's just a lot of context that it needs to to parse in order to solve the problem. And I guess for for the latter for more retrievalless tasks, it seems to me that sort of like you know a classic retriever with embeddings and you know search can probably do the job like relatively well enough. Um and it's probably a lot faster as well in terms of latency. But I guess how do you think about the sort of dynamic about you know obviously it's great at managing long contexts but I guess which sort of problems uh within that are sort of most promising. So I think like um for retrieval like problems there are a lot of edge cases in nasty scenarios where retrievers don't work or like you have to use different types of retrievers or you have to train a retriever um slash pre-index a retriever.

Um in a lot of these cases like rlms work out of the box. So I I I will give you a very simple example. Um so uh some folks uh in the scaling intelligence lab at Stanford um were working on like a um well I shouldn't say too much because it's not out but uh they're basically working on some like GPU coding related thing. Uh and if you're familiar with language models for GPU coding uh they suck basically and it really boils down to like they don't understand how to use the language properly. So this is an example I gave earlier, but the way that you would go about doing this is you need to like rag through your your documentation um and like hopefully like retrieve all the right information that the model needs to solve the problem. Uh and and basically what they found uh empirically is that like RLMs work significantly better uh for retrieving the right information.

Like even when they pre-index this very unstructured documentation, like they don't get anything meaningful out of it. Like it doesn't retrieve the right things. Uh it's too static. like they they need um a system that can more dynamically adapt to like what they want it to produce. Um and so in these cases like yeah they they work just out of the box. Um I think though like the the more forward thinking thing and it's that the reason I keep making this analogy to reasoning is like the R when you combine this like symbolic environment with the fuzzy parts of the language model you can solve a lot more problems reliably. So like if if you're solving like um I think a a really silly example of this is like all the problems that boil down to like oh um needle in the hay stack or like uh like 30digit multiplication like the fact that the language model can't do this doesn't matter like it it it should like all future language model systems should be able to deal with all of these types of problems without any issues.

Um and like even just in general like when you have really long context things that require multiple steps um language models make a lot of mistakes like so error propagates really quickly. Um and I think you want to avoid these situations in general. So in the future like I think RLMs in general should be applied to any benchmark like it doesn't actually matter what the task is because this kind of combining symbolic execution with recursive sub calls is a very very powerful primitive uh in my mind. >> Cool. Thanks. >> Y >> awesome. Um, Vamsy was asking how do you imagine RLM helping RLVR? >> Uh, is you mean the opposite or um >> yeah, I'm also not too sure. Uh, Vamsy, are you here? Uh so in your last slide you mentioned uh uh like we can integrate RLM into RLVR uh and uh and we uh so uh do you have any thoughts on how >> sorry yes I meant um using RLVR to bootstrap RLMs.

So what I mean by this uh so RLVR is reinforcement learning with verify verarifiable rewards. Uh basically what this means is like it's an environment where you have a reward uh like a reward signal that tells you that it's doing something correctly or it's not doing something correctly. Um I think this is we we used RLVR basically to do reasoning uh which is uh we were able to extract out these like chain of thought um like reasoning chains um and and get them to actually condition the model well by postraining on environments with a reward. So I think in a similar way if we scale RLMs it's the same argument. We want all of the decomposition kind of strategies to fall out naturally um by optimizing with respect to some reward. So we don't like I think the SFT components are important to get the model like started as like a warm-up but ultimately this is the the premise of this entire thing is that the model should learn the right behavior like the right decomposition behavior that is like a key part of of getting this all to work. >> Okay. >> Yeah. >> Okay.

Thank you. >> I think there's also a lot of demand for the slides. Alex, are you playing? >> Oh, um, >> yeah, sure. I can I'll send them to you. Um, >> perfect. >> Cool. Yeah, I I think Yeah, it's we're like 20 minutes past. Um, >> yeah, maybe we'll do one more question and then um >> Yeah. >> Um, Yosh, are you still here? You also can link to the GitHub. I I can send the the GitHub as well. Uh if people want to play with it, it's very easy to set up. Like the the RLMs are queried like a language model. So it's really it's really really like like simple. Um >> perfect. Uh completely endorse that the minimal code base very easy to set up. >> Yeah. Yeah. Um so yeah, Yash is asking that traditional LLM struggle with interruptions or midtask changes. Um since state is tied to a fixed context window, how does the RLM framework support interruption, pause and resume or goal redirection?

And how does this differ from standard tool calling or agent orchestration? >> Um sorry, can you repeat the question? I think I didn't. >> Yeah. Um so the question is traditional LLM struggle with interruptions or midtask changes. Uh so state is tied to a fixed context window. How does the RLM framework support interruption, pause and resume or goal redirection? And how does this differ from standard tool calling or agent orchestration? >> Oh, I see. Um I mean I think a language model cannot deal with interruption like natively. Um, typically how this will be implemented is with some kind of uh scaffold on top that uh will will add the extra information. So um sorry for an RLM though like it's quite easy or like it's it basically um you would just update the uh the input prompt in the environment um or like the environment like this this uh let me go back um this symbolic handle will be updated basically I mean you can also tell the model that it's been updated so it will go look for it um but uh this way the language language model itself doesn't actually have to like um deal with a bunch of extra context.

Uh yeah, I I haven't given this that much thought, but I think in general it should be supported without a lot of issue. >> Awesome. Um yeah, I guess do you have any final thoughts maybe about the the future to wrap in closing words? Um yeah. So I think like if people are interested um you know obviously training is quite expensive. So I I mean there's a lot of really really interesting work with RLMs on small models that I think is like a relatively affordable uh research direction. Um it's something I'm currently interested in. So, uh, I might be working on this over the course of the next few months. Um, so, but also, you know, there are some companies like Prime and Select, um, that I I am also, you know, like currently helping out with, uh, that are interested in in doing like, uh, you know, bigger training runs and and taking the bets that I'm I've kind of been talking about in this talk.

Um, which I I I think like I'm very excited for. Um I think there is though a lot of really really cool um future or related work that should be done. Uh one of them is on evals. I I think we talked about it a lot in this talk but like there aren't a lot of good evals and I have a lot of opinions about what eval should look like. Um so I'm also happy to talk about that if if people are interested in the future. But um I think like that to me like point number three is the biggest thing like we really need better eval um not only for RLMs but just to evaluate like you know future language model systems um and then you know for the more systems inclined people inference is always it's always a challenge um yeah but um yeah I mean I guess uh thank you everyone for coming uh hopefully this this talk was was informative um if you have have any more questions, you can just email me.

Uh my email is on my on my website, but also like just it's like kind of everywhere. Uh my my MIT email, so it shouldn't be too hard to find. Um but yeah, >> awesome. Yeah, thank you so much, Alex. Always a pleasure having you and so much interest, which is very welld deserved. >> Yeah, thank you everyone for joining. Um I know it's very late for some of you around the world. So appreciate all of you and yeah stay up to date with future talks on Alphacive. Uh you can just check out our site. We'll be posting talks um roughly every week. Um next talk will be Chang who will be talking about automating AI research and we we'll post the recording on our YouTube and yeah thank you so much everyone. >> Perfect. Thank you so much guys.
