# Ep. 40: Alex Zhang, Recursive Language Model Creator and MIT CSAIL PhD Student

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXSFVi3JEEo&hl=en](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXSFVi3JEEo&hl=en)

**Channel:** [Delta Institute](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCjtdv6IMdqoQy72wxqOKOaw)
**Duration:** 52:37

## Description

Alex Zhang is a 1st-year PhD student at MIT CSAIL and the creator of the recursive language model.

Delta Institute (deltainstitutes.org) is the most talent-dense community of engineers and researchers in the world. They’ve hosted events across the Bay Area, including both Stanford and Berkeley. Past event co-hosts include partners at Sequoia and Andreessen Horowitz, and one of the first ten employees at Cursor. Delta Institute also hosts the Delta Podcast, a series of video interviews with top researchers/engineers in order to help share their experiences and reach a broader international audience.

---

## Transcript

So, let's just go ahead and start off a little bit about yourself. >> Sure. Yeah, I'm Alex. Uh, I am a first year PhD student at MIT uh under Omar Kob and Tim Krosco. Um, I guess I recently graduated uh from Princeton a year ago. Um, mostly working on like NLP uh and RL for NLP type of stuff. Um, and there I I was working on a bunch of stuff related to benchmarking. Um, so I worked with some of the SweetBench folks on um like a benchmark for them. Um, and then I I kind of worked on some other stuff like kernel bench. Uh, and I got into like GPU programming things. Uh, and then I worked on um or I I guess like I had this idea for like a video game benchmark which I also worked on with Princeton folks. Um and then I started my PhD here. Um so yeah. >> Mhm. Awesome. Um okay so let's let's walk let's sort of walk back a little bit.

So um let's maybe start with high school. So you know a lot of people have sort of experienced coding in high school and maybe to some extent doing research or science fairs things like that. Maybe tell us a little about kind of like how your research interest first originated. Like was that um before college? Was that early on in college? Like how did that end up happening? >> Yeah. So I um I was big into video games for a long time. Uh so I got into programming um because I wanted to make games. Um so that is something I did like throughout I guess middle school uh and also high school. Uh and it's kind of how I got into ML and AI uh around I want to say like 2019ish. Um, so I originally wanted to make AI uh in the games that I was making. Um, but I started or I found out about a lot of like the um I guess like Alph Go, Alpha Zero type of works.

Um, and that was the thing I was interested in uh kind of through high school. So I did do um some like science competition stuff. Uh, I did ISF. Um, I'm actually not sure if that's what it's still called. Um but it's like this like international science and engineering fair. Um and I did like a deep learning related thing for that. Um but otherwise like I think for the most part I was more just interested in building stuff um building games like building models for very particular things. Um nothing I would say that like stood out too much. Um, I had like one um kind of like mildly successful video game uh that I had made when I was a lot younger. Um, but otherwise like most things were just just like hobby type projects. >> Mhm. Awesome. Um, so uh I guess like getting into undergrad, maybe just tell us a little bit about how you like ended up getting involved with research over time.

Like was that something that you were involved with? I mean like you know thinking back to you know your your time in undergrad, right? you were at Princeton. Sort of the very classic Princeton undergrad thing to do is, you know, a few big tech internships and then towards the later half either lean into quant, banking, private equity, so on so forth. Um, and especially quant um some people will go get a PhD. Like was that something that you were interested in from day one? Like how did you sort of navigate your different paths? Yeah. So I think when I entered undergrad um I was not planning on doing a PhD. Uh and also for context like I started my undergrad at like the beginning of co uh so like 2020. Um so I think at that time like I genuinely had no idea what I wanted to do. Um, I actually was involved in like quantum computing stuff at Princeton uh in the beginning.

Uh, and I also like I actually also thought that I might do some kind of like physics related thing uh or some kind of like pure math kind of thing. I I I wasn't sure to be honest. Um, I was into ML um to an extent. I think like I I was very like theory pill for a while. Um, and the reason I got into NLP stuff, uh, was my freshman year, I had emailed a bunch of professors, um, like in the department. So, I actually really wanted to work on computer vision when I when I first like kind of was getting into like um, joining a lab. Uh, but the only professor that had replied and agreed to let me join their lab uh, was Caric Nar Simhan, who's uh, one of the NLP professors at Princeton. Um, so I'm super grateful for that. Uh, I worked with him basically all four years of college. Um, doing a bunch of random like game stuff, uh, like text and game stuff, uh, like language grounding things.

Um, and then obviously I guess like Sweetbench came out. Uh, and so I like kind of helped out with that towards the end. Um, but yeah, uh, that's kind of how I I started at least with like NLP related stuff. >> Awesome. Okay, let's let's go ahead and maybe get into some of kind of what you were talking about. So yeah, I mean Carthic is amazing. We are definitely big fans of him at Delta. Um uh I think let's go ahead and start off with SWE and then we can get into like kernel bench language guided world model so on so forth. Um so Sweetbench is is something that's been very popular. Um but particularly you're working at Swebench multimodal. So maybe for the audience that doesn't understand I mean it's it's kind of intuitive what's the difference between SweetBench and Sweetbench multimodal is but maybe uh be a bit more specific about like what the multimodal capabilities are that Sweetbench multimodal is testing specifically um and kind of maybe give us a little bit more of a deep dive into like the difference between the two. >> Sure.

Yeah. Yeah. Um, so Sweetbench basically I think is is is maybe the more popular slashwell like umbrella term for everything now. Uh but originally it was I think either around 2022 or 2023 um John Carlos Oir uh Shinu Alex Wedig some other like a bunch of people at Princeton um were working on this this kind of idea for like at the time I think people were getting used to like language models actually being really good at doing like more interesting tasks. Um so the benchmark that they had developed was specifically like scraping these uh PRs from GitHub issues uh and basically setting up these like dockerized environments uh for language models to try and debug these tasks. Um and at the time too I think like vision language models weren't really that good. um or like at the very least if you were doing a SWE task uh you were not really using images or any other modality uh you were mostly just looking at the PR description in the code and like trying to get the model to debug this code.

Um so around like 2024 uh which is like a year and a half after the benchmark came out um they had been interested in basically looking at tasks where they're like most of the PR maybe is like a screenshot or like some other um kind of nontext related modality like describing what the issue is. Uh, and I think this is actually more more common than you'd think uh, in like just general debugging um, type tasks like if you look on GitHub or you look on if you're trying to debug like UI type stuff. Um, it's hard to describe these things purely in text. Uh so Sweetbench multimodal was sort of like an extension um not only for like multimodal inputs but also um Sweetbench itself is fully Python for the most part um and multimodal was kind of also like an exploration into other languages uh like JavaScript um and things like this and and also to see if some of the like scaffolds at the time or like the popular scaffolds like sweet agent or agentless or things like uh would actually work.

And so this was kind of at the time like we were working on this uh a lot of these agents uh did really poorly on this benchmark. And I think multimodal models were also kind of becoming popular. So this was like yeah this this sort of was the next kind of extension of Sweetbench um that that came out. >> But of continuing on you know you also worked on kernel bench which is super exciting. Um I think the intuitive idea a lot of people probably in the audience do understand which is you know like you are trying to write efficient GPU kernels you want to use LM to do it it's not an application that many people have studied as much as you know maybe other domains um I guess like maybe the more interesting things to cover here like what do you think are some of the limitations of of doing this like do you think this is something that can actually be productionized um obviously like you know first author an now has a company that's doing something like relatively similar in some ways um uh standard kernel I think.

So maybe just tell us a little bit about kind of your experience working on this like you know what like what did you find super exciting like what is maybe a limitation things like that. >> Yeah. Yeah. So uh kernel much is really cool. Um I think uh I don't know that much about standard kernel. Um but like I'm sure they're doing really cool stuff as well. Um I think like with for context too kernel bench is very explicitly like um I guess you can think of it as like translating or or transpiling PyTorch to uh CUDA or Triton um or like originally it was CUDA but I think in general it's just some GPU uh written code for uh from PyTorch which is what most researchers uh and developers use um uh at least maybe outside of Google Uh but I I think like there what I will say for GPU code generation is I think it's very possible.

Um and actually Simon who is one of the other uh first co-authors uh of kernel bunch and I wrote up this blog basically talking a little bit about some of the stuff that um we had been thinking about since kernel bunch came out and and what the community has been thinking about um and kind of where we see uh LLM generated kernels going. I think um if you want to have like fully oneshotted like no more kernel engineers like LLMs generate all kernels uh this is somewhat of an unrealistic thing at least uh at least for now it's somewhat of an unrealistic thing um I think that like part of the reason is that we are somewhat data bottlenecked uh and and this is something that uh also for context I'm pretty involved in like GPU mode uh and some of the like open- source efforts uh for GPU code genen in there.

Uh and and one of the things we've been doing is we've been running these leaderboards and these like kind of competitions for people to submit handwritten or like human written uh code for optimizing uh these like big kind of competition kernels. Um and this is all really important for like getting the base models to actually be good at kernel generation. Um but there are a lot of tricky details. um things like you know the hardware changes every like 2 years um like Nvidia will release a new GPU with a new like ISA and and things like this and this makes it more complicated as well because um there are a lot of different uh like even like hardware features between different GPUs uh and the model obviously is not going to understand this um and so like how you bake in all of these priors successfully uh is is kind of hard when you don't have a lot of data.

Um, and there's also this other piece of like there just aren't that many people out there that know how to write, you know, performant and correct code. Um, >> so I think, you know, GPU code assistance, uh, is definitely on the horizon. Like this will definitely be a thing and I think there probably will be companies that do this as well. Um, maybe something that is just supported as well natively in things like cursor. Um, but I think you know if you want uh like a like completely automated pipeline there there are a lot of parts that uh probably are not there yet currently. Um and almost in some sense like this is kind of a broader um thing of with LLMs in general uh we we've generally got uh gotten them to be very good at tasks that we as humans or like collectively we as humans are really good at even if they're really hard.

Um so an example of this is like competitive math uh like Olympiad coding. Uh these are like extremely hard tasks. Uh but in some sense like we have you know trained people to be good at these tasks and we have lots of data and lots of examples of um you know well-written code and like how to solve these tasks. Uh and there's a ton of structure I guess in this data that we've already kind of been able to sample out. Um and so models are also really good at these tasks. Um probably much better than I am at least. Um, but I think for GPU code generation, it's it's almost a similar problem, but with like a different constraint. Uh, and like we haven't really been able to solve these types of tasks very well. Uh, and it's something I'm like hopeful for in the future, but yeah, I I would say this is an open research question. >> Yeah.

Yeah. No, that that all makes sense. All right. Awesome. Uh, continuing on, um, maybe tell us a little bit about some of your work with world models. I think this is something that you've also been pretty interested in. um you know I think you had a paper um where you sort of like it's language guided world models a model based approach to AI control um this was also with Karthik um so world models are a very big area these days um to talk about so I guess um you can sort of assume that our audience knows what a world model is like maybe tell us about kind of like what specifically you are doing and what you think the impact and relevance is to kind of the current discussion of world models. >> Sure. Yeah. Um so I think nowadays like when people talk about world models they have like two two different views of it.

Um, one of them is the more traditional view which which is what my paper is is more about uh and it's what like the dreamer papers and and and a lot of the stuff uh maybe like 3 years ago was thinking about um which is like a world model in like the kind of MDP or like environment sense is like explicitly a model of like the transition probabilities of your of your environment. So um like it's quite literally a model of your world and you can interact with this model as if you were interacting with the environment. Um and in this sense I think world models are are really useful for a few types of things. Um number one is like I mean I I think what people associate with them now are these like really cool examples of like I can play Minecraft in a world model or like I can play Doom in a world model.

Um, and like you I I remember there was this like this demo maybe like a year ago of of them running this on like etched compute. Um, and there's like this website you can like play Minecraft on or like this really like trippy version of Minecraft where like um you walk around and like you know things change all the time and it's like fully rendered by a model. Um and and this this type of research uh is really interesting because um one of the things that you can generally do with this uh in uh this this kind of world model thing I think makes a lot of sense in like the the RL or like the reinforcement learning um kind of uh description of problems um in that like for model based RL usually The idea is you use you learn some model of the world and you use this to be like super super sample efficient.

Um and so like what I mean by this is like let's say you have um you're like NASA or something and you're exploring this new environment. Um but like the rover that you've deployed on this new planet or like whatever uh is like really expensive uh and it's like really expensive to get it there. So you don't you don't want it to break like you you you you can't really afford to just like have it run around and like do whatever. Um like a world model is really useful for basically simulating um like what it would be like like when you're on there. Um and like you can kind of bootstrap this to like build a better policy um for exploration. So this is kind of like the what the world model pitch used to be. Uh this is what Dreamer did for Minecraft and some other tasks and it was like really really cool.

Um, and my work on language guided world models was was basically this intuition of like, you know, at the time, I think like in 2022, uh, multimodal stuff was starting to become, I think, less of a toy and like more sorry, uh, more of like a serious thing. Um and kind of the idea was that um you know we can ground language and our visual understanding of the world in like the same kind of latent or embedding space. Um and so I kind of took this idea uh with some of the more traditional world model ideas uh to say like you know maybe you can describe the world or like maybe in addition to like learning a model of the world you can condition it on language and you can like modify the world. Uh, and there's like a lot of useful reasons why you might want to do this. So, like going back to the the uh kind of NASA rover example thing.

Uh, maybe like there's a lot of things that we as humans observe about the environment or like things that we want to tell uh the model to like kind of try and explore and and we can describe these things in language because it's very hard to describe them purely in an image. Um, and so that was kind of the um the idea for that. Um, but sorry, the the other thing I wanted to say was I think people talk a lot about world models in the context of large language models uh nowadays too. And kind of the idea is that like language models have a world model inside of them like they can model the world around them and and this is something that they like internally do to like answer questions. Um, I think this this view is like maybe a little bit less principled like it it it's sort of driven by like our maybe hypothesis or like um kind of thinking that this is how models work.

Um, but this is something I'm actually not too familiar with in general. Um I have seen a few like papers come out recently about this like kind of idea. But um yeah just to make the distinction like the the thing I was working on was much more related to uh the like dreamer style papers of world models for like 3D environments. >> Awesome. Um and let's go ahead and move on to video game bench and then we'll maybe kind of speedrun through a lot of other things that you worked on. Um so video game bench, right? You're sort of looking at BLMs for video games. Um, okay. So, it's an interesting application. Um, maybe tell us a little bit about kind of your applications beyond video games. Um, like are you seeing it translate to other tasks? Like we recently had the CEO of General Intuition on and kind of a lot of their bet is also kind of like you can translate a lot of things from video games to other things.

Um, what are your thoughts there? >> Yes. So, um, you know, video games are something uh close to my heart I guess. Uh, and in some sense like in AI, we've mostly solved most video games. Um, I'd say the more challenging ones at least. Um, I think what's interesting about Video Game Bench is that, uh, video games are designed to be solvable by humans. Like, they're designed to be easy in in in a lot of ways. Um, and so, you know, you'd expect a language model or like a vision language model to be able to reasonably solve a video game without much help. Um, and kind of the thing that we found with Video Game Bench is like the answer is no. Um, they can't really solve these things. Well, uh, which is interesting. Um, I think there there's a lot of ongoing work about like, you know, video games are are really easy and like if you can solve them, maybe you can solve more interesting like embodied AI tasks like uh, robotics related stuff.

Um, and like how you solve video game bench with a like a vision language model, um, is is also super interesting because unlike some of the older works that use like these RL these trained RL policies, uh, you know, vision language models are super generalizable like they they they work beyond just video games. Um, and so like if you prove you can solve a lot of video games, um, I think you also can use these learnings and and and these scaffolds to solve more general things. Awesome. Um, all right, continuing on. Um, let's get into recursive language models, I think, is is what it's called. Um, maybe just tell us a little bit about kind of this and just generally the project. Uh, I'm not sure if it's already a full-fledged research paper yet. Maybe that's still in the works, but to the extent that you want to talk about kind of like what was the motivation?

Um, what do you think special about it? >> Sure. Yeah. Um, so yes, recursive language models is not currently a paper. Um it is almost a paper. Um it was released as a blog post maybe two weeks ago. Um kind of the this is my first PhD project at MIT. Um the the idea here is like I think as a field we have struggled a lot with dealing with larger and larger contexts whatever that might mean. So that that happens in various different forms and flavors. Um, and I think the the dumb thing is that like we have kind of solved this problem already in in some ways. I I don't want to say solved but maybe like we have solutions to this problem which is something that was pointed out um many times on Twitter like when when we released this um with things like codecs uh or claude code like a lot of these methods like they kind of inherently deal with long context by you know calling sub agents like calling um like these summarization tools or like these like context management strategies and stuff.

Um, and I think recursive language models is is meant to be like a very kind of abstract um, but different way of viewing long context problems in general um, or just even general tasks because I think any task actually can be turned into a long context problem uh, in one way or another. And so the way that we've dealt with long context as a field for a while is like we build bigger and bigger models like we build models that can handle larger contexts. we train models on longer and longer maybe synthetic data so that hopefully like all this stuff is in distribution in some sense. Um and we pay like kind of exponential costs for doing this. Uh and I sort of the the the pitch of recursive language models is like this is really silly because like why spend like $1 billion, you know, building uh GPT6 that can handle double the context when you can just call GPT5 twice.

Um, and the other part of this is like, you know, the way that we've done agents for a long time is like we treat language model calls as like this like blackbox thing and we build an agent around it. Um, and this like doesn't really lend itself well to scale. And I think this is why we don't see agent scaffolds that really like hold across many many different tasks. uh like you will have a sui agent scaffold and you will have a like math answering scaffold and there's probably a lot of similarities between these two and a lot of the times they will do multiple language model calls uh but in some sense I think if we really want to scale and like follow the bitter lesson um we want this entire mechanism to be its own language model call and so that is the idea of a recursive language model the idea is like the language model itself self controls when it you know calls itself or like when it does recursive calls over like smaller versions of its context.

Um it is completely responsible with handling its context. Um but what this kind of means is that any individual model call will never actually be a huge model call if that makes sense. Uh so like you give this illusion to the programmer or like the user that like you're handling near infinite context. Um, but actually under the hood, uh, we really dumb down what a language model call is. Like we treat it as like a a function call that has limitations. Uh, but we kind of work around this using the language model itself. >> Got it. Totally makes sense. Okay, let's get to some other exciting stuff that you've worked on. So, you know, you've done a few different internships at a few different places. You're at Snapchat, Apple, Clario. Um, and and I think you've worked on a bunch of like really interesting models, right? like NEO1 colonel LLM AP so on so forth so maybe like to the extent that you're willing slash able to go over um you know you were also advanced AI and Sakana um Sakana is super interesting very exciting stuff for people in the audience who don't know um they are a lab um based in Japan that are that's basically doing a lot of really great stuff there um maybe any sort of things you want to highlight from from this experience like either some of the more software internships more research internships your experience maybe like what did you learn through these like little tidbits of time at these different companies? >> Sure.

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um so like I have done a lot of different internships I guess doing a lot of random stuff. Um so like I I think you know personally like it's clear from my like list of internships that I didn't really know what I was doing for a long time. Um like you know I I haven't interned at like OpenAI or or Deep Mind or places like these. Um, and I think maybe Sakana is the closest thing to that. Um, but one thing I will say is like interning at a bunch of these places like gave me a lot of perspective on like what I actually want to do. Um, and you know, they all work on very different things. Like I I was doing a lot of like very software heavy stuff um at like Apple or Clario. Um, I guess there was like some flavor of research to it, but for the most part it was it was very like software.

Um, and I think like with a lot of these companies, um, like you you kind of figure out or like from interning at a bunch of different places, like I think you you kind of figure out like what you what you actually want to work on. Um, and like what kind of stuff um, you know, maybe is useful for industry but like not something that you really care about, which is part of the reason actually I chose to do a PhD. Um, and I think like you know Vant for example is something like I I worked there uh right after I graduated. Uh, and I had no idea like basically anything about BiML. Uh, I I just knew what AlphaFold was basically. Um, and I think that for me was like a really unique experience. Um, because like I was working on like GPU uh like writing GPU kernels for them uh and also like touching parts of their like model training pipeline.

Um, but I learn a bunch of random stuff um about like AI for science and bioml and things like this. Uh, and and these are problems now that are very interesting to me uh as a researcher. Um, and I think the the other thing like you you probably will notice is that a lot of my research is kind of like all over the place. Um, like you know there's I think people who know who I am or like that I have met like probably know me for different reasons. Um, so like some people know me as like being very involved in GPU stuff or like GPU programming circles. Uh, some people know me as like someone who was involved in a lot of benchmarking things. Um, and some people now I guess know me for RLMs. Um, but I I think like a lot of these ideas kind of come out of just like doing a bunch of random Um, and like just kind of following like um like what you think is is most interesting like even if you don't know that much about it. >> Yeah.

Yeah. Know that that makes sense. Um, so I guess like from from your internships at like SNAP or whatever, like the sweet internships like um or maybe just more general other internships before you got your PhD. Um, I guess we we didn't hit upon this back in like kind of your intro journey, but now you are a PhD student at MIT. Um, maybe tell us a little bit about the transition of the more kind of like traditional internships at Princeton to like the now more research internships at MIT. And then also just tell us a little bit about kind of um you know the the switch in kind of your day-to-day. I mean obviously probably less class focused um at least hopefully in the next few years as you [clears throat] continue to finish more requirements. But um any like key things you want to hit on? >> Yeah.

So, um I think like research internship type stuff I would say is um more like like you have a lot more freedom I guess in the stuff that you you get to do. Um and like more sweet type internships like you kind of get siloed in on like doing something for that they need. Uh like Snapchat I think is is an example of this. I I did a research internship there, but a lot of what I was doing was was mostly focused on product stuff. Um, and I personally I like research internships more, but I think you also like it it really depends like I think at Sakana like I was working on just basically whatever I wanted to. Uh, and it's not always like this. Um, and and this depends a lot on like like who what team you work with and and kind of what they hired you for, I guess. Um, and so I think the transition from that to like being a PhD student is really easy because like even now I kind of just work on the problems that I think are interesting.

Um, I will say like I now that I'm a PhD student like I have way more ideas than time to work on a lot of these ideas. Um, which is kind of annoying. Uh, but you know when I was in undergrad uh I like I focused a lot on classes. I I will say I was very interested in math uh and like some other things and I think those things were very important for me. Um like some people might see it as a waste of time. Uh but for the most part like I think I had a lot of fun in my undergrad. Uh I learned probably a lot more in my undergrad I think than I I ever will from now on at least in terms of like technical or academic material. Um but yeah, I I would say like the PhD so far has been um kind of very like there is a lot of stuff you can do in a PhD I think that you cannot do in a job like even working at like a frontier lab.

Um and it's been very nice at least for someone like me so far. So >> yeah. >> Awesome. um how much detail are you allowed to go into like Sakana and like I guess to the extent you're able to maybe tell us about kind of what team you're on if you're able to talk about that or maybe more broadly like what kind of made Sakana an exciting experience and maybe different than some of your other internships. >> Yeah. Uh I I think I can talk about maybe not exactly what I was working on because we're we're still working on this now actually. Um but um so I think Sakana is a very unique place in that they their research team at least works on like basically anything like this is kind of the pitch that they give to people as well um which is like they're a very research focused lab um and a lot of the stuff they put out in the past uh like evolutionary model merging AI scientist um like these kinds of work or Darwin goal machine as well um these things are like super exploratory like super like um kind of foundational ideas I would say that like maybe don't have that much like use in production at the moment.

Um I was working with uh Robert Lang um at Sakana uh and he has done a ton of really cool stuff like AI scientists and things like this. Um and so I was working on a lot of like evolutionary method type of stuff. Um and I think this stuff is really really cool. Um, and kind of the reason why I think this is really cool is a lot of evolutionary method research in the past was kind of based on like um it's in some sense based on like random search with some constraints that you like help steer uh your search with, right? Um, and in the past like this was really hard because you would have to design an environment where you could actually like do this kind of steering meaningfully. Um but with large language models um you have a lot of structure in how you can do search uh and like it's baked into the model which is really exciting like you lose some guarantees obviously with with language model stuff um but it's a very very exciting space um so I do plan to use it um a lot in my research going forward as well >> and I think it's also very relevant for GPU stuff by the way. >> Yeah.

And speaking of GPU stuff, um like you sort of mentioned, you know, you've been super involved with the GPU mode community. So, um GPU mode is is pretty well known in the GPU community, but maybe some of our listeners are not necessarily um in the MLS/GPU community per se. So, I guess maybe give us like a slight pitch of like kind of a what you do at GPU mode, b what GPU mode is. Um kind of like a super quick elevator pitch like what exactly are you up to there? >> Sure. Yeah. Uh so GPU mode is basically this like online community uh mostly on discord and YouTube um dedicated to basically learning like teaching people how to write you know performant GPU code and then also like having working groups and discussing a lot of ideas generally in MLS. Um so I think with a lot of because GPU programming is is really really popular now.

Um there is kind of this need for like uh you know teaching people and and and trying to learn like all of this new stuff that's that's coming out. Um so the YouTube channel has a lot of resources for learning how to write GPU code. Um the the community is like a really excellent resource for like talking to people and like getting new ideas. Um and like one of the things that came out of GPU mode is this like GPU programming leaderboard. um which is like something that uh basically I I kind of described this before like it's these like competitions that are sponsored by companies like AMD and um uh I guess I can't say that much more but some some more stuff that's that's coming um with these like big kind of like 100k prize pools for like writing the fastest kernels. Um so I kind of got involved uh because I was I was just like you know lurking in the community.

Uh I met Mark who is one of the founders. um and some other folks who were like interested in setting up this leaderboard kind of system. Um and like I got involved in that and so like I I'm still very much involved in that and I also do some of the lecture stuff now or like host some of the lectures on the YouTube channel. Um but yeah there there are lots of uh wonderful folks in that community u and and a lot of people who are also much more experienced than I am in GPQ programming as well. So >> awesome. So, kind of like looking forward, you know, you have kind of as you alluded to, right? You've worked on a few different areas. You've worked on benchmarking. You're working on RLMs. You're working on um you know, I mean, you you've had various different internships. And I mean, like a lot of this is good, especially early on in your PhD.

I mean, kind of demonstrates that you've done a good job sort of exploring. Um, so I guess now we sort of get to the uh, you know, like picking kind of an area that you want to specialize in, getting really good at that potentially or a specific area of interest that you kind of want to double down on. Um, have you sort of like figured out like what that specific area is that you want to focus more on? U, maybe dedicate more of your research journey to like what are some of the things that you're excited about in kind of the near future? >> Yeah. So the short answer is I have no idea. Um, and I I say this because I think like I mean I've only been in the PhD for two months, so I I have no idea like even what problems are worth pursuing. But what I will say is that you know our field has a lot of I think it has a lot of lowhanging fruit.

But I think that lowhanging fruit is not necessarily what people should pursue especially in research because I think a lot of these ideas kind of get oneshotted by industry at some point. Um, but there are also a lot of ideas I think that are like they're not lowhanging fruit, but they're sort of like they're not hard to do. It just requires thinking a little bit deeper about like what is interesting like what is useful for the field. Um, so the example I would give is like video game bench. I think video game bench was a really obvious idea. Uh, and like there were kind of sparks of this earlier than when I came out with this benchmark. Um, there was like the claw to plays Pokemon stuff. Uh, and there was also um this lab I think at UCSD that did like this LM game bench thing. Um, and like they both had focused on like you know very specific types of games.

Uh, and I think that like this is all really cool and everything. Um, but the idea in my mind that was missing was sort of like the value of a language model playing games is not that it can play Pokémon. Like in fact, we can use RL to do this already. The value is sort of that it can play many games all at once, like without changing anything about the model. Um, and like that was a super simple idea that I think like was very very interesting or at least like to me like was very easy to do and also sort of obvious. Uh the other one is recursive language models. I think again it's one of those things where like you know a lot of people um will come and say like you know this has been done before or like is this not just X and I think the answer is yes. Like in some sense in very various instantiations of of this idea have appeared in our field but like for some weird reason like we haven't consolidated this into something more meaningful.

Um, and I think like there's a lot of ideas like this that kind of they're not obvious. Um, maybe at first glance and so I wouldn't really call it lowhanging fruit, but like they're very simple and like they kind of need to be formalized and stated properly uh before we can like really progress meaningfully as a field. Um and like there are so many things in my mind that like I want to do like on on this front that it becomes hard to like focus in on one topic because I think like when you focus in on one topic the unfortunate thing is that as a PhD student you don't have a lot of resources right so like you know if the thing you're focusing on is like hardcore math or something then yeah chances are no one's really going to work on this and like you kind of can just do it yourself. Um, but if it's an idea where like, you know, let's say it's like a VLOM type of idea or like a like a chatbot arena type idea, um, like I think the reason those ideas move so quickly in academia is that like the labs they came from like at in Skylab um are like these bigger teams of of of PhD students who are all working together towards this goal like kind of like a mini company of sorts.

Um, but like for me here at MIT like that kind of thing is not possible. And so like going deep into ideas like that are are very difficult. Um and like you also of course risk like you know a frontier lab is just going to do it instead. Um and so like I am a little bit like careful about choosing to go like deeper into things. I think with recursive language models I have a lot of plans for how to go deeper into this particular like research direction. Um, but I also know that like, you know, there are other people that are now like starting to work on this in in various different capacities and flavors. Uh, and so like in some sense I don't really want to compete with these people. Uh, because like I the way that I think about research is like, you know, if someone else is going to do the idea anyway, then like there's no reason for me to do it cuz it it's kind of like maybe I can do it a month faster, but like who really cares at that point, right? like I I think I would rather contribute something that I think can only come from me.

So >> yeah. No, I it's it's Yeah. No, that's that's a very fair like and pretty nuanced perspective. So I I think that's good. Um so okay so sort of like continuing on like you know you clearly have thought a lot about kind of this interplay between industry and research which is traditionally a question that we ask a lot of people but I guess um for you specifically just because I mean a lot of your industry experience has been internships and maybe like brief periods of working um full-time like what do you sort of see as promising from a industry startup or lab that's solving a research problem. And so like maybe maybe let's qualify the word promising. So you know there are a lot of quote unquote AI research startups like a lot of AI research startups. Now there's a difference between a AI research startup and a promising AI research startup i.e.

An AI research startup can have a bunch of really smart PhDs, but if they don't have a clear business direction, they're selling to enterprises and enterprises don't actually know why they would pay them money instead of a much larger company. That company is either going to die or get aqua hired. And so what we'll end up seeing is a lot of these startups end up getting aqua hired. So let's define the word promising to mean a company that does not get aqua hired and does not bust. So companies that might actually have a shot of IPOing or maybe alternatively companies that are actually solving something where there's some clear and unique mode. Now this actually removes basically 95 to 97% of existing startups where they have really smart people but it's not really clear like why they wouldn't get wiped out by a frontier model lab.

Not super clear what their unique differentiation is. Um you know we see a lot of really great startups. So you know we had Stephano from Inception recently. We had Michael Pulley from Radical Numeric, right? We had Py um from, you know, General Intuition. Like a lot of these are basically moonshot research startups, you know, like I mean, alternatively, some of the people that we haven't yet had on, but um you know, we've had Rashad Aarwal um who's from Periodic Labs. We haven't yet had Will Fetus, but um they're doing interesting stuff. We haven't had Mera Morati from Thinking Machines, but we've had Son Young, who's I think currently working part-time at Thinking Machines. So, we kind of have a little bit of an idea of like what might be interesting. There's cursor, but you know, cursor is right now fighting a battle against cloud code and a lot of these other places.

So, it really is quite nebulous. Like, it's not a very easy thing to think through. You know, Caric spent a year at Sierra where they're working on, you know, a lot of stuff like agents and customer support, but Sierra is now fighting against Decagon and both of them are fighting against a bunch of other enterprises that are trying to do very similar things. Um, and so it's very unclear like both a what like frontier model labs have a unique position. Um, b what startups have a unique position and then c what like applied vertical startups like a Harvey, Sierra, so on and so forth have a unique position as a result of their research. Like all three of these questions are very very unanswered. Um, and the reason that I think you're qualified to answer this is because it seems like you think very critically about like this interplay of like what research you should be working on as a result of what may or may not be impactful in industry and what may or may not be impactful down the road.

So based off of all of your training data from all of your friends that are now working at said startups or in similar locations and your experience at Sakana and maybe just by extension other friends at MIT, um, what do you sort of think? >> Yeah. Yeah. So there's there is a lot to unpack here. I think um I I I think this is actually maybe one of the more interesting pitches for why someone should do a PhD versus going to uh industry. Uh what I will say is I definitely believe that like maybe 95% of people should not do a PhD uh and they should instead you know go to industry work on really exciting problems and uh you know build the frontier of like the stuff that we use every day. And I think like a PhD does this in a in in a different way. But let me answer the thing first about like interesting problems versus practically useful slash problems that you can actually make money on.

Um, I think like unfortunately, you know, a a lot of companies, a lot of AI companies nowadays are kind of built on the idea of like if this works out uh to like in the way that everybody wants it to, uh, it can potentially make a lot of money. So, there are companies like this and then there are companies where it's like they just currently make money and and I'd say there's there's much fewer companies that do this. Curser is an example of a company I think that like is already positioned in a way where like the product is clear and like now they're battling with competitors um to kind of become the like standard uh ID that everybody uses. Um I don't have strong opinions on how companies like that survive. I think like generally, you know, I I think for them as long as like I use cursor and and I I think I have had problems with cursor in in maybe the past like three three to six no three months I would say.

Um and it like these are the kinds of of issues that like make you lose users. Uh and in some sense like there is no reason for me to switch from cursor like unless it starts performing worse. And so like for competitors of cursor, I almost think it's like hard for people to switch. Like unless for whatever reason they believe like for the general user, they believe there is a reason to switch out of using it. Um and like I think they're doing fine. Like if you work at a place like that, like I think your goals are very clear and the types of research that you do are are or research I guess that you do is very clear. Like I mean you you kind of know exactly what you're optimizing for. Um, and like if that is the type of thing that you like working on, then you know going to those places is great.

I think in my mind those are the companies that are closest to succeeding at the moment. Um, I think with more like moonshotty type startups, I I'm a little bit more hesitant to personally to work at places like those. Um, and and I think the reason is like unless I like truly believe that whatever they're doing makes a lot of sense. Like I I think the way that people think about it now is like if this thing works like then you know this is a great thing and I mean I agree but I I think a lot of the times like a lot of the ifs are like very strong. Uh and I I I almost think in a lot of ways when you work on problems like that like number one like you are very much like constrained to this problem like you're you're not going to be able to just pivot to something random. Um and and that is something I think like you know if you're someone who likes to like work on and throw away ideas very quickly.

I think a PhD actually makes a lot more sense for doing this cuz in a lot of ways like you're not tied to invest like what investors want or like you're not tied to these like shorter term deadlines. Um maybe someone would argue you are but at least for me personally like I I don't feel this way like I I feel like you know if recursive language models didn't pan out uh in the first month like I would just scrap it and work on something else. And there's like almost no risk to doing this, right? Like there's no I there aren't people and like money like there isn't money around me that's like controlling what I do. Um this is not always true even for academia, but at least for me, that's what I will say. Um, and I think it's like you're you're sort of playing this like this this dangerous game of like, you know, you think you have a lot of control over what you do, but I I I think in a lot of ways you don't.

And like some people are okay with this. Uh, some people are not. And so, like, that's, you know, I I think with a lot of these companies, they're for me just as risky as doing a research project in this area, um, just with a lot more money involved. And so like if it fails like you know it's it's a lot worse. Um but you I I wish the best of luck to all of them. Like I I'm very excited to see what a lot of these companies do. Uh and then the final thing I guess is like Frontier Lab stuff. Um you know Frontier Labs I I think they have now gotten to the point where they are it is very clear what they kind of should be trying to do. It is not clear what they like in practice what that means. So like all of them are going for AGI now, right? Or some some flavor of this. Uh and I think like this is a very lofty and and loose goal.

And so like it's like I I I I sort of think that for a lot of these companies too, they've almost gotten too big for their own good. And so like what I mean by that is like it's very hard for them to release things nowadays because it's sort of like if if what they release doesn't meet the hype of like you know like what is SSI and and thinking machines are perfect examples of this. I I almost think like there's very little in my mind that they could release for example [snorts] that would justify their valuations. Um, and like the only thing really they could release is like some crazy like groundbreaking thing. And like maybe they have these things um, you know, like internally, but I don't know. Like I I personally I I don't think they do. Um, they have a lot of really talented people, but that doesn't always translate to, you know, uh, these kinds of things.

And I think like OpenAI and Anthropic and these companies kind of have the same issue almost. Um, just they have released a little bit more than the other companies. Uh, and so like for for a lot of these places like I think they're kind of in a rush to get this idea out and that what that also means is like you are still kind of siloed in on this on this idea of like we need to get AGI and so like we need to do these components to get there and so you kind of ignore a lot of like really interesting ideas that might pop up uh for the sake of like this one very central goal. Uh and that's both a good thing and a bad thing. Um, but yeah, I I think with the with these companies, I don't know. Like I'm kind of 50/50 or maybe like 3070 on if they're going to make it or not. Um, I I think they've produced really good work, but like they've kind of shot themselves in the foot with, you know, like how much they're promising.

Um, so yeah. >> Yeah. Awesome. Well, without further ado, thank you so much for coming on the podcast. >> Yeah. Thank you so much for having me.
