# Recursive Language Models (RLMs) - Let's build the coolest agents ever! (Theory & Code)

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&hl=en](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&hl=en)

**Channel:** [Neural Breakdown with AVB](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC6MhHkSosYXAD-LTXBWyLMg)
**Duration:** 49:31

## Description

In this video, we explain how Recursive Language Models or RLMs work, look at actual trajectories on real problems, see how to implement it from scratch using Deno and Pyodide, and discuss what their key features and benefits are.

RLMs are an inference technique where a LLM interacts with arbitrarily long prompts through an external REPL. The LLM can write code to explore, decompose and transform the prompt. It can recursively invoke sub-agents to complete smaller subtasks too! Crucially, the subagent responses do not get automatically loaded into the parent agent's context, it gets returned as symbols or variables inside the parent's REPL. 
 
---
Follow me on Twitter to get next video updates: https://x.com/neural_avb

To join our Patreon and support this channel financially, visit: https://www.patreon.com/NeuralBreakdownwithAVB

Members get access to everything behind-the-scenes that goes into producing my videos - including code. Plus, it supports the channel in a big way and helps to pay my bills.

---

You can read the RLM paper here on Paper Breakdown:
https://paperbreakdown.com/abs/2512.24601

Arxiv: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.24601

---

Paper Breakdown makes it way easier to discover Computer Science research, get personalized paper recommendations to study every day, and access a premium collection of tools to study interactively with context-aware AI agents. Get 50% off using code - RLM50

---

Git repo:
https://github.com/avbiswas/fast-rlm

Pypi:
https://pypi.org/project/fast-rlm/

—-
Timestamp:
0:00 - Intro
4:36 - What are RLMs
11:13 - RLM trajectories 
29:30 - Implementation
45:00 - When to use RLMs and why

---

## - Intro [[0:00]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&t=0s)

Imagine you gave an LM millions of documents from the internet and ask it a simple question that requires it to piece together answers from multiple different documents scattered throughout this context. This is called the long context problem. You see, every model has a fixed context window and they cannot physically process information more than that limit. And even if they could, LLM suffer from a strange condition when it comes to long context inputs. Their retrieval performance looks like a U-shaped curve. Models are simply better at fetching relevant information that occurs at the very beginning or at the very end of its input context. Basically, its performance degrades in the middle zone. And there's also the problem of context rot. Since you're asking the LLM to answer a single question, 95% of the data may just be irrelevant. the LLM might hallucinate because of this garbage additional data that's nothing to do with the question that you're asking it.

So researchers have devised multiple different ways to get around this problem. For example, rags and multi-step react loops and codeact and sub aent architectures and combinations of all of the above. In this video, we will be talking about a simple algorithm that has come out of MIT, which is pretty much outperforming all of those other algorithms that I just mentioned. It's called recursive language models or RLMs. RLMs operate on a very simple principle. What if you made LLMs write code to interact with long prompts and recursively call itself over smaller snippets of the prompt? This video is going to be super exciting. Uh this repository will be made open source as soon as this video goes live. Uh so you can check out the code for yourself. If you're a member of my Patreon, you'll also get access to additional, you know, tutorial materials, slides, and everything else I've done alongside this project.

So if you want access to all of that, please do sign up on my Patreon because it also helps this channel to keep going and growing. Um we already have 100 monthly members now. So, if you're already a member, a massive shout out to all of you. Thank you for all your support. This video is broadly divided into three parts. First, we're going to deep dive into how an RLM works. Um, there's some very unique things happening inside RLMs that we need to unpack. So, do not skip this section. And we are also going to look at real RLM trajectories on a real problem to help solidify our understanding of how this works. In the second section, we're going to look at some code and I'm going to give you some details about how I implemented it from scratch. And in part three, we're going to do a comparison of RLMs with existing methods and try to answer the question, when and why should we use RLMs, if using RLMs is even right for your tasks.

All right, so that's going to be a lot of fun. And before we get into the video, I have a message from this video sponsor, myself. I'm building paper breakdown where you can study research papers with one click. Suppose you want to study about RLMs. Well, you just search for the paper and click study with AI and bam, you're in a chat with the PDF. Now, we also show a list of study goals to give you direction and guide you to ask the right questions about each paper. You can literally ask anything and a context aware LLM will respond in seconds. Responses also contain citation. So you can click on them to directly highlight relevant sections straight into the PDF. We don't want you to skip reading research papers at all. We just want to make it very easy. You can also generate flowcharts, uh generate code, get access to advanced search tools and also have a recommendation engine that updates daily according to the papers you read.

Getting started is completely free, but if you want access to the pro features, you can use this code to get 50% off. I'm having a blast uh building Paper Breakdown in public and I've used paper breakdown a lot to create this project in particular. So, I urge you to go try it and if you have any feedback, just DM me on X or you know, shoot me an email or something. I'm looking for any kind of user feedback that I get at this stage. So, thank you for considering hope you get a try out. All right, with all that out of the way, let's finally go straight into the main parts of the video where we first start with discussing what is an RLM. Let's go.

## - What are RLMs [[4:36]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&t=276s)

All right. So, let me distill down the whole point about RLMs in a few bullet points. If you understand all of these bullet points that I'm about to list, you're good to go. Recursive language models are an inference paradigm where a language model interacts with arbitrarily long prompts through an external programmable environment or anpl. Number two, the LLMs can write code to programmatically explore, decompose, and create new transformations of the prompt. Number three, it can recursively invoke sub aents to complete smaller subtasks. basically zoom in on specific strategic regions of the prompt and call separate LLMs to work on them. Number four, and this is important, the sub aent responses do not get automatically loaded into the parent agents context. It gets returned as symbols or variables inside the parents RPL.

And finally, number five, RLM agents can return responses in two ways. Number one, it can auto reggressively generate answers just like normal LMS but special it can construct answers inside a variable and then return that variable instead. Okay, so I think you were following till like part two or part three and then suddenly it sort of escalated like what do you mean by symbols and variables and you know RPL and you know all of that and I understand when I first read the paper I was struggling too. uh this is very nuanced. So what we're going to do is break down each of those sentences one by one and I'm going to also show you a real example on the side so that you can better ground those theoretical explanation with a practical real world example. Okay. So first I said RLMs are an inference paradigm.

There are methods where you can use RLM trajectories to train a model but we're not going to discuss about that in this video. At its core, your model is already trained and the RLM is a scaffold. Scaffold basically means it's an external system that prompts the LLMs in specific ways to make it do things. It manages its context and stepby step achieve a larger more complex task. Next, I said a language model interacts with arbitrarily long prompts using a programmable environment or an RPM. Arbitrarily long prompts simply mean they are well arbitrarily long. It could be any big data that you're sending into an LLM uh to do a task. Suppose you have a really large prompt that contains over 300 Lex Friedman podcasts. It has the guest's name and the transcript of everything that happened in that podcast.

It has about 30 or 40 million characters. And let's say you want this LLM to look at this data and answer a simple question like find what the first 10 machine learning guests had to say about AGI. So obviously you can't directly pass this prompt into the LLM because well it's probably not going to do a good job at reasoning over such a long context data even if it somehow magically fits in its context window. So let's see how an RLM will do this. Well, first what we're going to do is we're going to save this entire string that contains the task description as well as the CSV file inside a Python variable. And what we're going to do is we're going to give the LLM access to this runtime. We're going to ask the LLM to write some code to explore what this context is and try to do its task by writing code.

And that brings us to our next sentence. The LM writes code to programmatically explore, decompose, and transform parts of the prompt. Let's see what that means. Well, imagine you are in a Jupyter notebook. You have some large prompt saved in this variable called context. Let's say it's literally that context CSV file with the instruction on top. The cell is hidden from you. You cannot directly read the text, but you'll have to write some Python code here to learn about your task and also complete it. So what would you do as a human with your human intelligence? Let's say you print out the first 500 characters of this string. If you run this, you get a peak into the context. You have some idea about what your task is. From here, after you read this first 500 characters, you can already see that okay, this is about a Lex Friedman podcast.

There's a CSV, you can see the column headers, and you can see the first line being truncated. So you have some idea about what this data looks like under the hood. Then you write some additional code to find the line number where the CSV begins. Then split all the lines and then loop over each of them to print out the first 200 characters of each line. We are not really reading all of the conversations that happen. We are just finding out the structure of the data. And there's another thing that is worth noting. See how we are never rewriting or rerunning old code. That is exactly what a RDPL is or a read eval print loop is. When the LLM executes a piece of code, the Python runtime remembers the state it was in previously just like these blocks in the Jupyter notebook. So the model does not need to rewrite the whole script from scratch every time.

It just constantly writes new blocks, sees the outputs, and then takes another action of writing the next block until it figures things out block by block. And of course, the LLM can access a variable it wrote in the previous block as well, like that lines variable. It can even write functions and be able to access it later on. That's kind of cool. You basically have an LLM that interacts with the context or the prompt using a Jupyter notebook. It is just peeking at slices of the data and trying to understand what to do to proceed further to complete its original task. So in other words, it chooses what it wants to see. It uses its intelligence to write code to peak into specific sections of the context and then selectively load that into its own context. Think about that for a minute. Let your mind be blown before we go to this next section because this is going to get a lot spicier.

Okay, I hope you had some seconds to think about this because now we're going to see some actual logs. Let's see how an actual RLM approaches problems.

## - RLM trajectories [[11:13]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&t=673s)

So let's say you have asked your LM generate names of 50 fruits and return a dictionary of each name and the number of R in each fruit. So this is that old strawberry count the number of Rs in a strawberry example. Now we know that if you pass this prompt to an LLM, it might miscount the number of Rs because an LLM is not actually counting those hours. It's actually doing next word prediction. And so the number of Rs can be wrong. Let's see how a coding agent like an RLM would approach this task. Uh here I have you know like a TUI app which will help us to see RLM trajectories. Now this one is a very simple problem. So there are just two steps that the LM took to finish off the job. On the left you'll see the code that the LLM wrote at that step and on the right you'll see the output that it received after running that code.

And uh if I press O, you'll see the final output that uh the LLM wrote. And as you can see, there are all of these uh fruits that and their corresponding um number of hours, which is what we asked for. Now, let's see how they actually did it. So, as I said before, the context is already preloaded into the environment. So, the LLM can just print out anything related to the context. So here for example it's it's checking its type uh its length uh and it's trying to print out the first 500 characters and the last 500 characters. And after doing that it realizes that it's just a context length of 98. It's a very small context prompt and here is the task that it has been asked to do. Generate names of 50 fruits and return a dictionary of each name and the number of r in each fruit. So in the next step it does this.

It generates the names of the fruits and then it creates a dictionary that literally counts the r and puts it inside this fruit_r_count dictionary and then it prints that and returns it right here. And you can see that this is what happens after it finishes its job. Notice how it did not auto reggressively try to generate this dictionary. it did not like auto reggressively um you know generate this curly brackets then apple col0 banana 0 but if you put this same prompt into chat GBD or gemini or some you know any lm that's what they will try to do but here because it has access to a python kernel and all of this it can just write code and return the answer directly with a variable now I can also ask the llm to ensure it does indeed have 50 fruits in the list because currently it is not doing that.

So maybe I could write a prompt uh extend the prompt and say ensure that there are 50 fruits before returning the output. And let's say I run this. Okay. Okay. So now after it did that it has added this assert statement in the middle and because there were actually 51 fruits instead of 50 it saw this error when it tried to run the code. So the code never got to this final uh statement. It actually finished much earlier because the assert didn't go through. So what it did is that it regenerated the fruits and then run the code correctly this time. Okay. So let's see another example. Um, this one is from a data set that contains some emails and information if it's spam or ham. And now we're going to pass the whole log into an LM and and ask it to find out if the number of spams were greater than the number of hams.

And here you see that the LLM took five steps and it answered that spam is less common than ham, which was actually true for that specific data set. Uh now as as usual it does some exploration to see what this context is about and it finds the information like okay contains 44,48 characters but only the first 500 and the last 500 characters are shown and it can see that um this is a data set of text messages containing spam or ham labels and it understand that it will have to calculate the exact answer given this data point. So after knowing all that information, it starts to do some exploration. Uh it tries to print out 3,000 characters from the data set. Uh and then it probably realize that uh the labels are already present in the data set. So all it needs to do is just extract the labels and then you know do a counter.

So the next thing it does does some reaxis to find this specific pattern uh and then print out the total number of entries and all that. So first it passes all of that. It confirms that there are in the 266 entries that got passed. Um and then entries in the date range uh spam count and ham count and then it understands that okay spam is less common than ham by just writing the code. After it prints this out, it gets to see it in the next step as well. So in the next step it basically does some additional verification until it finally answers the question saying answer spam is less common than ham which is what the correct answer is for that data set. So hopefully that sort of explains how these rm trajectories work but it's about to get a little more complex than this because now we're going to talk about recursion.

We actually already talked about the sentence five which is about how LLMs return answers. Um, we saw an example, the spam ham example where the LLM literally generated the answer and then put it inside that final function. And we saw the first example where we were seeing that are counting on fruits that the answer was not auto reggressively generated. It was actually placed inside this specific dictionary and then that dictionary was returned as the answer. So actually part five I covered first already and part four I'm about to show an example of how cool this is. At any point while it's exploring this context and all of this it can split tasks and assign it to a different RLM. If it finds some information in the context that requires heavy work to process and is more of a subtask than its actual bigger task, then it can call an LLM to do that part and then get back an answer.

But there's a very important distinction to be made between simple sub aents that we see with let's say clot code and well any other sub aent architecture and RLM. And this actually combines this the sentence three and sentence four as well. You see when the sub aents return an answer the return answer gets saved inside the main agents Python RPL. I want you to understand this as a concept first. So let's test that out. Uh instead of saying this, let's also just sort of poke the agent to send this to a sub agent. Now in a real scenario, you're never going to actually do this. you just want the RLM to be a black box that just finishes your tasks and gives it back. But here, just for the demonstration of it all, I'm going to poke it to do that. Instead, I say generate the names using a sub agent.

So, let's see. UV run testr.py. Okay. So, that finished running. We can see the logs here. But let's look at the logs in our cool terminal. Okay. So now you can see that there was a sub agent being called right here. Now I actually lied to you when I said earlier that an LLM is generating this. This particular step is so obvious and so common in every RLM sub aent that it is actually being programmatically run before the LLM even gets called. So the LM does not have to rewrite the same same few lines every time a sub aent gets called. The idea is that you can add anything here that will inform the LLM what the context is all about. So here I just have programmatically arranged so that this block always gets called before the LLM takes its first step. So step one is actually when the LLM starts to do anything.

Now you can see that uh what the LLM has actually done here is it has called this LLM query function. I'll soon show how I have set this up so that when uh the llmc query function is called inside the python rpl, we actually trigger different sub agent being spawned. That's engineering. We are not going to talk about the engineering and implementation aspects of this thing just yet. Um that's coming in section two. But for now just understand that when a model calls llmc query it basically triggers another llm to perform the task that it has sent it. Generate a list of exactly 50 unique fruit names. Return only the fruit names one per line number 1 to 50. Do not include any other text. Print fruit response. So it has called lm query and it has printed fruit response and this is the response that it has gotten.

Now obviously you can see that this response was not generated by this particular agent. It was generated by this sub agent which we can also see the logs of. So obviously the sub agent just uh created this list um and then uh you know just you know returned this final result and well that's what basically happened inside the sub agent just generated the list returned it um and now in step two of the LLM is after it has uh gotten the results from the sub agent what it basically does it it removes the numbering like one apple becomes apple and then it appends it into a list and then it asserts that uh it is in fact 50 fruits which is very cool. Now obviously if this came wrong that it was not 50 fruits it will just call the sub agent again so that it returns it. Now here's another thing about RLMs.

Um the quality that you're going to get out of RLMS depends on a couple of different factors. The base language model that you're using and how good it is at coding. If you're using good coding models like cloud opus and all of those, you're probably going to get great results. If you're not using good coding models, you're going to get subpar results because obviously a lot depends on how the code is written and how it structures a problem in its own weights and tries to decide how to plan out a code. So in this example, I'm actually just using Miniax M2.5 for sub aents and ZI's GLM5 for main agent. So I have switched back and forth between both of those models. I think both of those models are really great at the tasks that I have tested here. The second thing that the results are going to depend on is obviously the system prompt itself.

I'm going to show what exactly the system prompt of my application look like and I'm also going to show the system prompt that's present in the RLM paper. um because the authors themselves said that for different models they sometimes have needed to change the system prompts up a bit to get the performance that they were looking for and I can confirm that even for me when I was trying Miniax M2.5 and um the GLM5 models I did have to make some adjustments to the prompt so that I got the kind of results that I was looking for. Let's get back to the code now. Okay, so it does an assert. Uh then it does this fruit ar count wherein it just creates that dictionary of fruit and the number of hours and then finally it returns it in the next step. There you go. Again, notice it did not repeat the code it had already written in step two.

It just checked if everything is correct and then it returned it. So in this case you can see that it printed out all of the floats and it and it did load all of that into its context. But when it's an input token the prompt runs parallelly meaning all of these tokens they get processed parallelly. But when an LLM is generating it generates auto reggressively meaning one token at a time which is much slower. And that's why you'll see that input tokens often cost much less than output tokens when you're paying API pricing. And RLMs are designed to um take advantage of that because here you're seeing that the LM does do some some static verification if the results is in the right format before sending it but it does not read that data from before and then generate a dictionary auto reggressively to return the result.

Uh so I'm really trying to hone in this one point over and over because this is what uh that is so different about how um RLMs are compared to other sub aent architectures. This thing this final thing where you can just pass in any Python objects and it works. And the second thing is this sub aent thing where a sub aent can pass any result and it does not get loaded into the context of the parent agent automatically. It said it gets loaded in as a symbol here in the Python RUPL where the main agent can then do additional transformation of that variable. This is the coolest part and you have to appreciate these things to to fully understand what an RLM is and why is it getting so popular like why is it beating those benchmarks and why is it doing it at such a cheap rate. I'll show another example before we move to the implementation part of the video.

And this is an example from the long bench hotpot QA data set. Basically, here you have an entire story book and a simple question that requires long-term reasoning. Here you will see some pretty cool stuff happening. Um for example, the question here is what happened as a result of Anvoy and her fiance discussing giving the money to Saul. Uh okay. And the first thing that the LLM tries to do is find out where envoy occurs and then try to print some context about what happens to envoy from its first occurrence. It doesn't find too much happening. So it goes to broaden his search uh by you know searching for ano fiance salt money etc. Um and then it finds how many times they occurred and then it continues to find more and more information by by doing this find operations. After a bit of that um it basically finds a section of the context where it thinks the answer might be.

So it calls another LLM that and that says that okay you're reading you know the story book you know and the question is this. So I want you to search through the text and find this blah blah blah. And the cool thing is that now whatever the sub agent finds, it never has to look into the uh specific messages inside the sub agent's trajectory. The context of the main agent remains free from all of that noise that happens when the sub agent is doing its task. And indeed the sub agent does a lot of stuff. tries to find specific sections probably trying to find some string sacrifice um such a lot for some reason um and then eventually it actually calls another sub agent asks another question and then that returns the answer to it and a very underrated fact about this is that because you're accessing everything through Python you also have causal dependencies because you know which events happened when the events that happened earlier in the story versus you know later in the story.

This is actually a very powerful tool that you don't directly get with a lot of say rack type architectures where you need to maintain additional metadata to remember the causal relationships between different chunks of a story. Um well anyway the sub agent has returned its answer. Here is a final answer and as I said uh they their engagement was entirely broken off which was actually the right expected answers of this specific question in that benchmark. These sub agents uh they don't share any information among each other. So even if you like run eight nine sub aents in parallel and they're trying to do similar tasks there could be different methods that gets created uh in the future which allows sub agents to uh share the same file system or share the same common library that allows them to do repeated tasks more easily.

Another cool thing about how sub agents work uh and that's true for you know other types of agents um not just rlms is that the uses of cache tokens you know here you can see I've printed out the token usage throughout this trajectory the total stands for the total overall token usage P is the prompt input tokens C is the completion tokens cache is the number of prompt tokens that were actually hitting the cache and because uh the sub agents They work step by step. Their previous history is already stored in the KV cache. So, you're hitting the cache a lot more often. If you're hitting the cache, the cost of input tokens is drastically lower because the provider does not have to spend compute to actually run those prompts. It can just directly load it from the cache. And so, it drastically reduces the cost in that way as well.

And finally, you can see that the completion tokens was 9.8K.

## - Implementation [[29:30]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&t=1770s)

4.2K 2K of that was thinking token. So before every code that gets written obviously the LLMs also do a reasoning step here just similar to how methods like code act work where you reason first and then write some code and so here uh the reasoning behind writing this particular code can be searched right here. The question asks what happened to this? So let me search for when envoy and her fiance discuss giving money to salum. Extremely riveting story. I hope you enjoyed this little story time with me. In the next section, I'm going to give you some practical tips about how to implement this. The code will be accessible via my Patreon, but the whole repository which contains the RLM package and the final version of the code will be made open source. So, you can go check out the code, but if you want access to all of the tutorial, the intermediate files that I'll be showing, then you can sign up for my Patreon that also supports the channel.

So, uh I hope you do that. Now the main challenge in uh designing the RLM is actually how do you create the RDPL? How do you create the sandbox where uh the agent can just run code without causing any security issues on your main operating system. Uh and for that there are a lot of different ways to handle it. For example, you can use Docker and then just run the code inside the Docker container. Now the problem with doing that is that Docker takes a bit to load up which makes it a little less uh efficient in terms of the time it takes to run these things. Uh the second option is to use this little library called Python restricted. Um, it's not a sandbox and it does not really isolate anything, but it's a good uh option to use if you're sure that the code that's going to get run is not going to be dangerous or uh impact your file system or your operating system.

Uh, in the examples that I've shown so far, I could have just written it with Python restricted, I think, but I've gone for something else. U oh, there's another way to uh execute this, which is by using remote sandboxes. There are some companies that allow you to run code remotely, not on your machine. Um, you can also do that. Uh, obviously I didn't do it for my tutorial uh because u it seemed bit of an overkill and also slow at the same time. The architecture I ended up using was inspired by what DSP uses for their DSP.RLM module. Basically, Dino is a runtime which gives you a NodeJS sandbox. And the cool thing about JavaScript is that you also have access to Pyodide. Uh Pyodide is a Python distribution for the browser and NodeJS based on web assembly. Meaning it basically lets you run Python inside JavaScript or NodeJS.

And another cool thing is that piodide is anpl meaning we can do all of that stuff that we were talking about where we write some code execute it and then write another piece of code but the old code still stays like how it happens in a Jupyter notebook and that's the architecture that we are going for. So let's say you have a user and the user gives some kind of a query and that initializes our Dino orchestrator. This is the Dino orchestrator which we are also going to call the Dino agent. Now the Dino agent has a lot of things. First it has a piodide instance. So Piodide is going to run our Python code. Now the first thing that this Dino agent is also going to do is going to run some code once it gets instantiated and it's going to do some code right insert the query that the user gave us into the context.

Just sort of initialize it. define what happens when lm query gets called. It is also going to do those print statements that we talked about, right? Print len of context and all that. Also declare those additional Python functions that we talked about like definition of final and definition of final which are kind of used interchangeably. Um this gets run before any of the LLM stuff even begins. And what that does it it generates an output. Now this whole thing this gets sent into the large language model. So the LLM basically receives the context from the Dino agent and it outputs some stuff. Specifically the LLM receives information like the messages so far. And the by messages here we just mean code written before their outputs. In practice, how this is implemented is just this part is sent to the LLM.

Just just the type of the context, the length of the context, any type of additional metadata that you want the LLM to be aware of. You don't really pass in these things into the LLM. Obviously, you can't pass in the context at all. Uh but you don't even need to pass in all of these additional information. The LLM is aware about their existence because um they already have access to the system prompt. The system prompt contains all of the information it needs to take actions into the environment and then it receives the messages from the dino agent returns the code that should be executed. Now upon receiving this code um the dino agent basically directly passes the code back into the pyodide instance and that creates a new output and then this code and that output gets appended to the messages and then sent back to the LLM inside the pyodide instance if LLM query is called or any of this final final v stuff is called you know you can have a function about doing um semantic search for example like rag based stuff as well or do a web search or a web fetch for example.

So anytime these special functions are called the pyite instance identifies that and calls the dino agent back and does something. So for example if it's an LLM query uh it basically calls the dino agent again and that basically creates a brand new instance of this whole thing. It creates a new Dino agent that has a new task and the query here is being sent by what the LLM had generated um from that await LM query stuff that we talked about earlier. You're basically just having this loop where you're communicating with an LLM inside a deno runtime and then if LLM query gets called you create more runtimes [clears throat] often parallel runtimes uh to achieve your task and then when those sub agents finish their task they basically return the outbacks and once the root agent returns the final answer that we can just return back to the user.

If some of this does not make sense let's step by step build some more intuition by looking at some code. Okay, so this is the simplest sandbox. Here we are first loading pyodide inside this JavaScript file and and then we have written some simple Python code. Here we're just printing hello world and then we're calculating factorial of n you know returning the factorial back in the main function which is what gets executed once you use dino to call this file do a console log then we load piodide and then to run the code that we wrote up here we just write this await piodide run python async python code and let's see what happens if we run this first we have this initial python environment then we have the print statement that actually happens inside Python. And then we finally have the return value which is 120 which we printed out here which got returned inside the factorial.

Here's the cool part though. If I declare a variable here um let's say a equals to 5 and let's say I create um you know another piece of code Python code 2 and let's say here I want to print out um print a. Now you can see that a was actually created here and I'm trying to print it here. Now, will that work? Let's see. It's actually remove all of this. We don't really need it for this example. And I'm also going to add some print statement. Print code one. Uh, print code two. So, we first execute pi run async. And then we do that. Um, code two. We don't need this. Okay. [snorts] So, as you can see here, code one prints, code two prints, and five is getting printed. meaning this thing uh executes afterwards. Now, if I just do this now, let's say a= a + 1, print a. And then if I run this a bunch of times and print this.

Oops, I had a colon there. You see that even if we ran this code separately, it's an RDPL. So, it advances 6 78. That's what we wanted. Okay. In the next example, let's have something in the Python code trigger something in JavaScript. So, let's say we write this simple function. It's a test function where you get a number and let's say you multiply it by two. Um, remove some of this additional code that we no longer need. And let's say test function a print in Python test function A. Now, if I run this code now, it's not going to work. Uh, let's see. [snorts] Right. So here it says that name test function is not defined because even though we have uh defined a test function in JavaScript land we haven't really hooked it up with Python yet. So to do this use this globals set function which adds this new function onto the list of things that are available to our Python code.

If you run this now you know we had a equal to 5 then test function was called and now back in Python we have the new value test function a. And hopefully this already encourages you to understand what you can do with just this. Let's also see how simply you can call LLMs as well. Well, you've probably seen this code a lot of times by now. We import OpenAI. We load in our environment variables. Uh in this case, I'm using Open Router, but you can use anything else as well. Like I'm using Gemini 2.5 light, which is the cheapest model I could find to run this simple prompt. Say hello. So, let's run that. Here we are also allowing n meaning uh we are allowing the environment variables that we have set in our OS to be accessible to the sandbox and we also allow net meaning we are allowing incoming and outgoing connections to the internet from the sandbox.

So if we run that we are calling the open router with prompt say hello and you can see you know Gemini 2.5 flashlight has indeed returned us some output. Now we actually have all of the building blocks ready to go. Let's see. Let's try to put some of this into action by designing a simple system which generates some code from an LLM and then passes it into a dino task to execute the code and just print out the result. Let's see how we can do that. So let's start a new TypeScript file. Let's copy over some of the code we already have here. Generate code about the topic you are given. Um return your code inside repl your code blocks. Let's see if that simple prompt works. We have to escape these characters. Okay. And then let's uh also wrap this inside a function. Async function generate code.

And then we're going to create a message. Ro would be system content prompt. Um let's use an actual coding model as well. um miniax miniax um m2.5 and then return the code for testing. Let's say generate code Fibonacci sequence up to five numbers and then if you run this and here you can see it has generated a code. Okay. So here I've just copy pasted that entire code here. Obviously you can also import it you know here in the main function instead of writing that static Python code that we were writing previously we instead generating the code by passing in a prompt and then we're loading piodide as usual and running it. Let's see. And here you can see that this was the code that was generated by the LLM. And then when we ran it, this is how it looked like. Now hopefully that sort of closes the loop for you.

Can generate code with an LLM and then execute it with Dino and Piide. I'll just quickly go over some nuances about how I've implemented certain things in this project. So I have this sub aents.ts function. It defines this llmc_query function. It runs this code const out await sub aent and then pass in the context that was passed through lmqu query and sub aent is basically the same function. So this is a recursive function where you pass in the context and we maintain the sub aent depth. If the sub aent depth exceeds a certain length we don't allow further recursion. This is a way to prevent too many network calls happening and emptying your wallet. Using Python's global set, we are ensuring that whenever the Python code generates this LLM query inside its function, inside its code, we call this specific code in Typescript.

And again, if the sub agent depth exceeds certain depth, we just throw an error and return back to the LLM. The maximum depth has been reached, you must solve this task on your own without calling LLM query. And notice it's a throw you error meaning the program will crash instead of returning std out it will just literally crash the calling llm will notice that I can't call any more lms I have to do this on my own. The other cool thing about it is how we do the truncation. Here I have written simple function that says that if the number of characters is beyond 20,000 now obviously you can tune this you can make it 2,000 or something. If it's more than that we are basically going to truncate your output. We are not going to show you the entire context. There's a basic truncation trick that we handle at the Dino level at the orchestrator level.

So that even if the LLM tries to print out too many things, we limit it as to how much context that it can really read in. You'll also see I've implemented primary and sub agent meaning uh if the root level is zero, we're going to use a stronger model and if it's lower and if it's not a root agent a sub agent, then we can use a smaller model. Now, I'm not saying that Miniax M2.5 is a lesser model than GLM5. Um, I love both of these two models. It's amazing how good both of these are. I'm just setting this up as an example. You can use, you know, Opus here and, you know, Sonnet here as the sub agent. The final thing I want to talk about is the system prompt. In the first line is just informing the LLM about what its task is. You're tasked with answering a query with associated context. you can access transform and analyze interactively in an RDPL environment.

So the LLM gets to know it's in RDPL environment and it can also recursively subquery LLM and all of this. So it has information about what the RDPL environment is uh initialized with like the context variable, the LLM query, the final and all that. Um then it informs how to interact with uh the context like the ability to use print statements to view results. Um then uh how to call sub aents and then there's more information about when to call sub agents and when to try to do things on your own. It is mentioned several times that your sub agents are powerful tools. So you should use them if you need to. Um and then there are some examples of how to write queries like really help the LLM to understand how it should be interacting. You can see there are a lot of cool examples here and instructions.

## - When to use RLMs and why [[45:00]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxaVvvrezbY&t=2700s)

So if you just go through that prompt in the paper and also I've made a lot of adjustments uh for this project on to that prompt as well. So you can also have a look at my prompt but do have a look at the paper prompt first because that should be your single source of truth not my version. So um after you go through all that you will have a better idea about what exactly is going on what they're trying to do and how they're teaching the LM uh through in context learning how to behave in uh this RLM environment this RLM scaffold. Now that pretty much covers everything about the implementation bit. Um again just implement this step by step. Just build block by block like I showed you here and obviously you have cloud and you have open code. You have all these cool AI tools to help you walk through this.

Please do let me know in the comments or you know reach out on X if you have any issues follow this part of the tutorial and I'll try my best to answer well in the next section the final section um let's quickly wrap up summarize everything we've learned but more importantly answer the simple question when should we use RMS what are its main benefits and why is it winning these benchmarks let's see because of RLM's properties, it is less susceptible to context fraud because the LLM chooses what context to load in to its context window. With code, with React, um the LLM just reads everything even if it's from a sub agent's answer or from some tool call it did. It will read everything into its context window. RLMs won't do that. So, for that reason alone, it is much more efficient in terms of what it loads into the context.

Also, if you're using like rags already, you can still keep using rags as a pre-processing step before you pass your rag string into an LLM as a concatenated string that was extracted from or your rag output. RLMs can also understand which text happened before the other text in the context. This is something rags don't do on their own unless you add some specific metadata about the position of the chunks as well. Like if you want to find some text that happen after something you're trying to retrieve because the retrieval index is based on similarity search, it has nothing to do with the uh you know location of the text in the context. So that is something you need to think about if a rag is more applicable to your domain than something like a codeact or react or a or you know or an RLM. And also let's quickly enumerate the reasons why RLMs are doing so well.

First we got to talk about focused attention or like focal attention. Basically instead of attending to all token pairs in a huge input, the model can target specific sections to load into the context. It can therefore reason over long distances by combining information from multiple different sections of the prompt. Multiplestep reasoning. Many tasks are naturally recursive like multihop QA codebased search or say multi-document summarization where you need information from multiple different parts of the document. RLMs natively match this multitask structure because there's a inherent hierarchy to it. Number three, RLMs are more robust to noise because even if 99% of the input is irrelevant, uh the recursive search and the intentional context load means that the LLM never really sees inputs that it is not trying to see.

Number four, the results are composable variables. This is very important. Sub aent answers are not loaded directly into the LMS context. they're returned within the Python RPL and the agent can choose to either peak into into the results or just directly use the results to compose the final answer. Um, number five, it can support arbitrarily long outputs. Remember, RLMs do not need to auto reggressively generate answers. They can just construct answers inside a Python variable. This means the model can in theory at least return infinitely long outputs. Next, cost savings. Because the model decides what to read and when to recurse, you often pay for what you need. Not scanning everything, it limits the input prompts. And also, because sub aents maintain their own messages, you're often hitting KV caches, meaning the cost is even lower because the output tokens, which are often the most expensive parts of LM generation, you're just writing small pieces of code.

So, you're writing like 5% of of what you're reading. All right. I've been recording for 3 hours now. Uh, my voice is gone, but hopefully you've understood what RLMs are, how to build them, why they're pretty cool. Do have a look at my Patreon page. Do have a look at Paper Breakdown, and do have a look at the repository that I link in the description. That's it from my side. I'll see you in the next one. You're magnificent. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise.
